
                        AUBREY'S 'BRIEF LIVES'

                            _ANDREW CLARK_

VOL. II.

                          HENRY FROWDE, M.A.

                 PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD

                            [Illustration]

                    LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND NEW YORK

[Illustration: AUBREY'S BOOK-PLATE

_From MS. Aubrey 6, fol. 11ᵛ_]




              _'Brief Lives,' chiefly of Contemporaries,
                              set down by
                         John Aubrey, between
                        the Years 1669 & 1696_


                     EDITED FROM THE AUTHOR'S MSS.

                                  BY

                             ANDREW CLARK
      M.A., LINCOLN COLLEGE, OXFORD; M.A. AND LL.D., ST. ANDREWS

                           _WITH FACSIMILES_

                           VOLUME II. (I-Y)

                                Oxford
                        AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
                                 1898

                                Oxford
                    PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
                         BY HORACE HART, M.A.
                       PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


AUBREY'S 'BRIEF LIVES'




=... Ingelbert.=


[A]Mr. Ingelbert was the first inventer or projector of bringing the
water from Ware to London[1] called _Middleton's water_. He was a
poore-man, but Sir Hugh Middleton[2], alderman of London, moneyed the
businesse; undertooke it; and gott the profit and also the credit of
that most usefull invention, for which there[3] ought to have been
erected a statue for the memory of this poore-man from the city of
London.--From my honoured and learned friend Mr. Fabian Philips,
filiser of London, etc., who was in commission about this water.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[A] In MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 1ᵛ, Aubrey has this note:--'In Pond's
Almanack, 1647, thus--"Since the river from Ware to London began by
Edward Pond, Jan. 2, 35 yeares. 'Twas finished, Sept. 20, 34 yeares"--.'




=John Innocent= (14-- -1545).


[4]At Doctors Commons is 'argent on gules a mayd stark naked with a
chaplet in her hand dexter.' The name I could never learn, till by
chance, in Hampshire, by a courtier. It is the coate of Dr. Innocent,
deane of Paule's and master of St. Crosses, tempore Henrici VII. Borne
at Barkehamsted, Hertfordshire; where he built a free-schole, where
this coat is in severall places. 'Tis endowed with 500_li._ per annum
for 120 scholars from any part of England. The Visitor is the Warden of
All Soules, Oxon.




=Henry Isaacson= (1581-1654).


[5]Mr. Henry Isaacson was secretary to Lancelot Andrews, lord bishop
of Winton. Was borne in this parish (of St. Katharine Coleman) anno
Domini 1581; christned--ex registro[I.]--Septemb. 17ᵗʰ; and buried in
this church. He died about the 7th of December, 1654. He had severall
children: four sonnes still living, one is a minister at Stoke neer
Ipswych in Suffolk.

[I.] St. Catherine Coleman, 1581--'Sept. 17, Henry Isackson
baptised.'--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 89ᵛ.

In the chancell here[6] I find this inscription, on a marble
grave-stone, viz.:

    'Here lyeth the body of Richard Isaacson, esq., Eastland
    merchant, and free of the Paynters Stayners of this citie of
    London, who having lived in this parish 58 yeares, slept in
    the Lord 19 January, Anno Domini 1620. [II.]Henricus filius et
    haeres hoc memorabile posuit pietatis ergo.'

[II.] Scil. Henricus praedictus.

[7]Memorandum:--<Thomas> Bourman, Dr. of Divinity, of Kingston upon
Thames, did know Mr. Isaacson, and told me that he was a learned man,
which I easily believed when I heard he was secretary to that learned
prelate, who made use of none but for merit. The Dr. told me that when
he presented his _Chronologie_ to his majestie King Charles the first,
'twas in the matted gallery at White-hall[III.]. The <king> presently
discerned the purpose of the treatise, and turned to his owne birth;
sayd the King, '_Here's one lye to begin with_.' It seemes that Mr.
Isaacson had taken it out of ... (a foreigner), who used the other
account. Poor Mr. Isaacson was so ashamed at this unlucky rencounter,
that he immediately sneak't away and stayd not for prayse or reward,
both which perhaps he might have had, for his majestie was well pleased
with it. He wrote severall little bookes, besides his _Chronologie_:
quaere of the minister's wife (his niece) their titles. He was of
Pembroke-hall, in Cambridge. He was there about Master of Arts standing.

[III.] 'Twas presented in an ill hower. An astrologer would give
something to know _that day and hower_. He wanted a good election.


[8]_Concerning Henry Isaacson[9]._

  Sir,

I find that my grandfather dyed in St. Cathrin Coleman's parish London,
the 19ᵉ January, 1620, and to my best rememberance upon his gravestone
in the chancell it was ingraven that hee had lived in the said parrish
58 yeares. He <was> fined for not serving the office of shereif of
London, being chosen in the yeare 1618.

My father died in St. Cathrin Coleman's parrish above-said about the
7ᵉ of December, 1654, which is neare 34 years after my grandfather's
death. I calculate from the tyme of his birth to my grandfather's death
to bee 39 yeares: ad[10] the 34 yeares after my grandfather's death to
the 39 before: 39 + 34 makes 73 yeares his age--which all the familie
agree that hee was seaventy three yeares of age when hee died, soe that
hee was borne in anno 1581. Borne in anno 1581, dyed aged 73, makes
1654 the yeare when he dyed. And in all probabillity hee was borne in
St. Kathrin Coleman's parrish, my grandfather having lived soe long
tyme there: the church booke, if extant, will soone resolve yow--I
never heard any thing to the contrary.

My brother William Isaacson could more exactly give you an account of
the degrees he tooke, if any, but the University was Cambriege and
the College Pembrooke-Hall. I thinke I have heard hee was Mr. of Arts
standing, but am somthing uncertayne of this.

                                                 RAND. ISAACSON.

    Fifeild,
  the 21ᵉ Aprill 1681.

[11]In the table of benefactors in the Church of St. Catherine Colman,
viz.--

                   '1620: Mr. Richard Isaacson'--the
        chronologer[12]--'2 _li._ 12_s._ per annum to the poor.'




=James I= (1566-1625).


<A life of 'James R.' is entered in the index to MS. Aubrey 6 (see vol.
i. p. 8), as contemplated by Aubrey. If written, the life was hostile
in tone, as may be seen from the following query towards it (Aubrey, in
MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 347: 8 Sept. 1680):--

'Pray search that booke[13], and see if you can find the ballad, or
verses, on the coronation of king James--

    And at the erse of them marched the Scotish peeres
    With lowzie shirts, and mangie wrists, went pricking-up their eares.'>




=... Jaquinto.=


[14]Dr. Jaquinto: physitian to pope ..., then to king James[15]. He
went into the marshes of Essex, where they putt their sheep to cure
them of the rott, where he lived sometime purposely to observe what
plants the sheep did eat, of which herbs he made his medicine for the
consumption, which Mr. E. W.[16] haz.




=David Jenkins= (1586-1663).


[17]Judge Jenkins, prisoner in the Tower of London, Windsor, etc.,
<eleven> yeares, for his loyalty. He would have taken it kindly to have
been made one of the judges in Westminster Hall, but would give no
money for it, [so[18] the Lord Chancellor Hyde never preferred him].

He was of very good courage. Rode in the lord Gerard's army in
Pembrokeshire, in the forlorne-hope, with his long rapier drawne
holding it on-end.

Obiit Dec. 3, anno Domini 1663; sepult. at Cowbridge church in the
south aisle in Glamorganshire. No remembrance yet (1682) set up for him.

[Quaere[19] Sir Robert Thomas whereabout in the church or chancell.]

[20]David Jenkins hath writt a learned treatise of the lawe, in folio,
of cases twice judged (quaere nomen); and an 'opusculum' (_Lex terrae_,
etc.) in 16mo.

Borne at ... in Glamorganshire. He was of Edmund Hall. Afterwards of
Graye's inne. One of the judges[21] in South Wales. Imprisoned a long
time in the Tower, Newgate, and Windsore. Was the only man that never
complied. Dyed about 1665, at Cowbridge in Glamorganshire.

He marryed Sir John Aubrey's sister.

[22]David Jenkins, judge, was borne at Hensol, the place where he
lived, in the parish of Pendeylwyn in com. Glamorgan. He was reciting
this verse out of Ausonius, not long before he dyed, to Sir Llewellin
Jenkins:--

               Et baculo innitens, in qua reptabat arena.

Scripsit Opuscula, contayning severall little treatises, viz. Lex
terrae, etc.; Rerum judicatarum censurae octo, in folio; praeter alias
ejusdem naturae ineditas.

He was one of the judges of the Carmarthen, Cardigan, and Pembrokeshire
circuit before the wars. In the warres he was taken prisoner at
Hereford. Long time prisoner in the Tower, Newgate, Wallingford, and
Windsore. Never submitted to the usurping power (I thinke, the only
man). All his estate was confiscated; and was always excepted by the
parliament in the first ranke of delinquents.

In his circuit in Wales at the beginning of the warres, he caused
to be indicted severall men of those parts (that were parliament,
etc. engaged against the king) for highe treason; and the grand jury
indicted them. Afterwards, when he was prisoner in Newgate, some of
these grandees came to him to triumph over him, and told him that if
they had been thus in his power, he would have hanged them. 'God forbid
els!' replied he--which undaunted returne they much admired.

The parliament intended to have hanged him; and he expected no lesse,
but resolved to be hangd with the Bible under one arme and Magna Charta
under the other. And hangd he had been, had not Harry Martyn told them
in the house that

                 Sanguis martyrum est semen ecclesiae,

and that that way would doe them more mischiefe. So his life was saved,
and they removed him out of the way to Wallingford Castle.

He dyed upwards (something[23]) of fowrscore yeares of age at Cowbridge
in the county of Glamorgan,[24] on St. Nicholas day, November[25] the
sixth, 1663; and in that church lyes buried, yet without a monument,
but I thinke my cosen intends one.

'Tis pitty he was not made one of the judges of Westminster-hall for
his long sufferings; and he might have been, he told me, if he would
have given money to the Chancellor--but he scornd it. He needed it not,
for he had his estate againe (1500 _li._ per annum), and being old and
carceribus confractus. Mr. T. H., Malmesburiensis, told him one day at
dinner that 'that hereafter would not shew well for somebodie's honour
in history.'

[26]Sir Llewellin Jenkins remembers himself kindly to you. He hath made
a very fine inscription (which is an abstract of his life) in laxe
Iambiques for judge David Jenkins. I would have him send it to you, but
he is too modest.




=Sir Leoline Jenkins= (1623-1685).


[27]Sir Lleuellin Jenkins, knight, was borne at Llantrithid in the
countie of Glamorgan, anno domini....

His father (whom I knew) was a good plaine countreyman, a coppyholder
of Sir John Aubrey, knight and baronet (eldest son of Sir Thomas),
whose mannour it is.

He went to schoole at Cowbridge, not far off.

David Jenkins, that was prisoner in the Tower (maried a sister of Sir
John Aubrey), was some remote kin to him; and, looking on him as a boy
towardly, diligent, and good, he contributed something towards his
education.

Anno Domini 164<1>, he was matriculated of Jesus College in Oxford,
where he stayed till (I thinke) he tooke his degree of Bac. Artium.

About that time Sir John Aubrey sent for him home to enforme his eldest
sonne Lewis Aubrey (since deceased, 1659) in grammar; and that he might
take his learning the better, he was taught in the church-house where
severall boyes came to schoole, and there were 6 or 7 gentlemen's
sonnes (Sir Francis Maunsell, bart.; Mr. Edmund Thomas; Mr. ... ...)
boarded in the towne. The young gentlemen were all neer of an age,
and ripe for the University together; and to Oxford they all went
under Mr. Jenkins' care about anno 1649 or 50, but by reason of the
disturbances of those times, Sir John would not have his sonne of any
college. But they all studyed at Mr. (now Sir) Sampson White's house,
a grocer, opposite to University College. Here he stayed with my cosen
about 3 yeares or better, and then, in anno 165- (vide Mr. Hobbes' _de
Corpore_, 'twas that yeare), he travelled with my cosen and two or 3 of
the other gentlemen into France, where they stayd about 3 yeares and
made themselves masters of that language.

He first began[28] the Civill lawe, viz., bought <Arnold> Vinnius on
Justinian, 1653[29].

When he brought home Mr. Lewis Aubrey, he returned to Jesus College
(quaere, if he was of the foundation).

After his majestie's restauration Dr. <Francis> Maunsell was restored
to his principallship of that house, but being very old and wearie
of worldly cares, he kept it not long, before he resigned it to Mr.
Jenkins.

Gilbert Sheldon, archbishop of Canterbury, and Sir John Aubrey were
_co-etanei_, and contracted a great friendship at Oxon in their youth,
which continued to their deaths. In the troublesome times after Dr.
Sheldon was expelled, he was a yeare (I thinke) or two with Sir John
at Llantrithid, where he tooke notice of the vertue and assiduity of
the young man Mr. Jenkins. After the king's restauration Sir John
Aubrey recommended Mr. Jenkins to him; made him. Anno <1668> he was
archbishop of Canterbury: Sir <William> Meyric, LL.D. and Judge of <the
Prerogative Court of Canterbury>, dyed, and the archbishop conferred
that place on Mr. Jenkins.

Anno ... he had the honour of knighthood.

Anno 1673, <he> was sent with Sir Joseph Williamson, plenipotentiaries,
to Nemeghen: I remember that very time they went away was opposition
of Saturn and Mars. I sayd then to the earl of Th<anet> that if that
ambassade came to any good I would never trust to astrologie again.

Anno 167- sent ambassador to ..., from whence he returned anno
16[79/80].

March 25, 1680, he was made Principall Secretary of Estate.--When
I came to wayte on him to congratulate for the honour his majestie
had been pleased to bestowe on him, he recieved me with his usuall
courtesie, and sayd that 'it had pleased God to rayse-up a poore worme
to doe his majestie humble service.'

He haz a strong body for study, indefatigable, temperate and vertuous.
God blesse him.

When Mary the queen-mother dyed at Paris, the king of Fraunce caused
her jewells and treasures to be locked up and sealed. His majestie of
Great Britaine sent Sir Llewellin (which is Leoline in Latin) to Paris
concerning the administration [1668[30]].




=George Johnson= (1625/6-1683).


[31]It pleased God at Whitsuntide last to bereave me of a deare,
usefull, and faithfull friend Mr. Johnson who had the reversion of
the place of Master of the Rolles; who generously, for friendship
and neighbourhood sake (we were borne the same weeke and within 4
miles and educated together), gave me the graunt to be one of his
secretaries--which place is worth 500 _li._ per annum. He was a strong
lustie man and died of a malignant fever, infected by the earl of
Abington's brother, making of his will. It was such an opportunity that
I shall never have the like again.

[B]George Johnson, esq., borne at Bowdon parke, March the sixth 1625/6;
respondet that he remembers his mother sayed 'twas just at noone. His
mother was three dayes in labour with him.

Fever at Bowdon about 1669; quaere R. Wiseman.

Fever, most dangerous, at London Nov. and Dec, 1677.

Burghesse of Devises, 166-; made one of the judges of Ludlow, ...;
maried about 1660; reader of the Middle Temple,....

Mr. Vere Bertie[32] was his chamber-fellowe in anno 1655, the
wintertime, which was his rise.

My honoured and kind friend George Johnson, esq., died at his house at
Bowdon-lodge, of an ague and feaver on the 28th of May[33] at 10ʰ A.M.,
being Whit-munday,

                     cujus animae propitietur Deus.

His death is an extraordinary losse to me, for that had he lived to
have been Master of the Rolles I had been one of his secretarys, worth
600 _li._ +:--sed fiat voluntas Domini.

He went from London the Monday before; came home Tuesday; ill that
night. Thursday pretty well. Fell ill again of an intermitting fever
and died.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[B] Anthony Wood notes:--'you do not set downe the yeare that Mr.
Johnson died.' In 1683 Whitmonday fell on May 28. The reversion of the
Mastership of the Rolls was granted to Johnson Aug. 15, 1667, but Sir
Harbottle Grimston, appointed Nov. 3, 1660, did not die till Jan. 2,
1684/5.




=Inigo Jones= (1573-1652).


[34]Inigo Jones' monument[C]--this tombe is on the north side of the
church, but his bodie lies in the chancell about the middle. The
inscription mentions that he built the banquetting howse and the
portico at St. Paule's.--Mr. Marshall in Fetter lane tooke away the
bust, etc. here to his howse, which see. Quaere Mr. Oliver + de hoc.

[35]Inigo Jones: vide epitaph at Mr. Marshall's.

Mr. <John> Oliver, the city surveyor, hath all his papers and designes,
not only of St. Paul's Cathedral etc. and the Banquetting-house, but
his designe of all Whitehall, suiteable to the Banquetting house; a
rare thing, which see.

Memorandum:--Mr. Emanuel Decretz (serjeant painter to King Charles 1st)
told me in 1649, that the _catafalco_ of King James at his funerall
(which is a kind of bed of state erected in Westminster abbey, as
Robert, earl of Essex, had, Oliver Cromwell, and general Monke) was
very ingeniosely designed by Mr. Inigo Jones, and that he made the 4
heades of the Cariatides (which bore up the canopie) of playster of
Paris, and made the drapery of them of white callico, which was very
handsome and very cheap, and shewed as well as if they had been cutt
out of white marble.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[C] Aubrey gives a drawing of the monument. It is a rectangular stone,
having the inscription on the front; at one end 'the banquetting-howse
at Whitehall in bas relieve,' at the other 'west end of St. Paule's in
bas relieve.' On the top, his bust, in the middle, and at each end a
pinnacle. In MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 163, on Jan. 27, 1671/2, Aubrey notes
that the inscription is 'yet legible, notwithstanding the fire.'




=Thomas Jones= (16-- -1682).


[36]... Jones, B.D., obiit at the house of <Francis> Charlton, esq.;
buried the 8th of October, Sunday, 1682, at East Barnet in Middlesex:
[student[37] sometime of Ch. Ch.; master ...].




=Ben Jonson= (1574-1637).


[38]Mr. Benjamin Johnson[D], Poet Laureat;--I remember when I was
a scholar at Trin. Coll. Oxon. 1646, I heard Dr. Ralph Bathurst[E]
(now deane of Wells) say that Ben Johnson was a Warwyckshire man--sed
quaere. 'Tis agreed that his father was a minister; and by his epistle
dedicat.[IV.] of 'Every Man ...' to Mr. William Camden that he was a
Westminster scholar and that Mr. W. Camden was his school-master.

[IV.] In his dedication of his play called _Every man in his humour_ to
Mr. Camden, Clarenceaux:--'Since I am none of those that can suffer the
benefits confer'd upon my youth to perish with my age. It is a fraile
memorie that remembers but present things.'--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 55.

[Anthony[39] Wood in his _Hist. <et Antiq. Univ. Oxon.>_, lib. 2, p.
273, sayes he was borne in Westminster: that (at riper yeares) after he
had studied at Cambridge he came of his owne accord to Oxon and there
entred himselfe in Ch. Ch. and tooke his Master's degree in Oxon (or
conferred on him) anno 1619.]

His mother, after his father's death, maried a brick-layer; and 'tis
generally sayd that he wrought sometime with his father-in-lawe[40]
(and particularly on the garden-wall of Lincoln's Inne next to
Chancery-lane--from old parson <Richard> Hill, of Stretton, Hereff.,
1646), and that ... ..., a knight, a bencher, walking thro' and hearing
him repeat some Greeke verses out of Homer, discoursing with him, and
finding him to have a witt extraordinary, gave him some exhibition to
maintaine him at Trinity college in Cambridge, where he was ... ...
(quaere).

Then he went into the Lowe-countreys, and spent some time (not very
long) in the armie[41], not to the disgrace of ..., as you may find in
his Epigrammes.

Then he came over into England, and acted and wrote, but both ill, at
the Green Curtaine, a kind of nursery or obscure playhouse, somewhere
in the suburbes (I thinke towards Shoreditch or Clarkenwell)--from J.
Greenhill.

Then he undertooke againe to write a playe, and did hitt it admirably
well, viz. 'Every man ...' which was his first good one.

Serjeant John Hoskins, of Herefordshire, was his _father_. I remember
his sonne (Sir Bennet Hoskins, baronet, who was something poeticall in
his youth) told me, that when he desired to be adopted his son: 'No,'
sayd he, ''tis honour enough for me to be your brother; I am your
father's son, 'twas he that polished me, I doe acknowledge it.'

He was (or rather had been) of a clear and faire skin; his habit was
very plaine. I have heard Mr. Lacy, the player, say that he was wont
to weare a coate like a coach-man's coate, with slitts under the
arme-pitts. He would many times exceed in drinke (Canarie was his
beloved liquour): then he would tumble home to bed, and, when he had
thoroughly perspired, then to studie. I have seen his studyeing chaire,
which was of strawe, such as old woemen used, and as Aulus Gellius is
drawen in.

When I was in Oxon, bishop Skinner (of Oxford), who lay at our College,
was wont to say that he understood an author as well as any man in
England.

He mentions in his Epigrammes a sonne that he had, and his epitaph.

Long since, in King James' time, I have heard my uncle Danvers say
(who knew him), that he lived without Temple Barre, at a combe-maker's
shop, about the Elephant and Castle. In his later time he lived in
Westminster, in the house under which you passe as you goe out of the
churchyard into the old palace; where he dyed.

He lies buryed[V.] in the north aisle in the path of square stone
(the rest is lozenge), opposite to the scutcheon[42] of Robertus de
Ros, with this inscription only on him, in a pavement square, of blew
marble, about 14 inches square,

                          O RARE BENN IOHNSON

which was donne at the chardge of Jack Young (afterwards knighted) who,
walking there when the grave was covering,[43] gave the fellow eighteen
pence to cutt it.

[V.] Ben Johnson lyes buryed in the north aisle of Westminster Abbey,
just opposite to the scutcheon of Robertus de Ros, under the middle
walke or path of square stones, on one of which is wrote

                         O RARE BEN JOHNSON[44]

[four yards from the pillar].--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 55.

His motto before his (bought) bookes was, _Tanquam Explorator_. I
remember 'tis in Seneca's Epistles.

He was a favourite of the Lord Chancellor Egerton, as appeares by
severall verses to him. In one he begges his lordship to doe a friend
of his a favour.

'Twas an ingeniose remarque of my lady Hoskins, that B. J. never writes
of love, or if he does, does it not naturally.

He killed Mr. ... Marlow, the poet, on Bunhill, comeing from the
Green-Curtain play-house.--From Sir Edward Shirburn.

[45]Ben Johnson:--Ben Jonson had 50 _li._ per annum for ... yeares
together to keepe off Sir W. Wiseman of Essex from being sheriff. At
last king James prickt him, and Ben came to his majestie and told him
he 'had prickt him to the heart' and then explaynd himselfe (_innuendo_
Sir W. W. being prickt sheriff) and got him struck off.

Vide his _Execration against Vulcan_. Vide _None-such-Charles_. When
B. J. was dyeing king Charles sent him but X _li._ Quaere T. Shadwell
pro notes of B. J. from the duke of Newcastle; and also quaere Thomas
Henshawe (as also de saxis in Hibernia). Quaere my lord Clifford of the
gentleman that cutt the grasse under Ben Jonson's feet, of whom he
sayd 'Ungratefull man! I showed him Juvenal.'

[46]B. Jonson; one eye[47] lower then t'other and bigger. He tooke a
catalogue from Mr. Lacy of the Yorkshire words[48]--his hint to _Tale
of a Tub_ for the clownery.

[49]Ben Johnson had one eie lower than t'other, and bigger, like Clun,
the player: perhaps he begott Clun. He tooke a catalogue from Mr. Lacy
(the player) of the Yorkshire dialect[50]. 'Twas his hint for clownery
to his comoedy called _The Tale of a Tub_. This I had from Mr. Lacy.

[51]King James made him write against the Puritans, who began to be
troublesome in his time.

         A Grace by Ben Johnson, extempore, before King James.

    Our King and Queen, the Lord-God blesse,
    The Paltzgrave, and the Lady Besse,
    And God blesse every living thing
    That lives, and breath's, and loves the King.
    God bless the Councell of Estate,
    And Buckingham, the fortunate.
    God blesse them all, and keepe them safe,
    And God blesse me, and God blesse Raph.

The king was mighty enquisitive to know who this Raph was. Ben told him
'twas the drawer at the Swanne tavernne, by Charing-crosse, who drew
him good Canarie. For this drollery his majestie gave him an hundred
poundes.

[52]_This account[F] I received from Mr. Isaac Walton (who wrote Dr.
John Donne's &c. Life), Decemb. 2, 1680, he being then eighty-seaven
years of age. This is his owne hand writing._

[53]Ffor yoʳ ffriend's que. this:

I only knew Ben Johnson: but my lord of Winton knew him very well,
and says he was in the 6º, that is the vpermost fforme in Westminster
scole. At which time his father dyed, and his mother marryed a
brickelayer, who made him (much against his will) to help him in his
trade. But in a short time, his scole maister, Mr. Camden, got him a
better imployment, which was to atend or accompany a son of Sir Walter
Rauleyes in his travills. Within a short time after their returne, they
parted (I think not in cole bloud) and with a loue sutable to what they
had in their travills (not to be comended); and then, Ben began to set
up for himselfe in the trade by which he got his subsistance and fame.
Of which I nede not giue any account. He got in time to haue a 100
_li._ a yeare from the king, also a pention from the Cittie, and the
like from many of the nobilitie, and some of the gentry, wʰ was well
payd for loue or fere of his raling in verse or prose, or boeth. My
lord of Winton told me, he told him he was (in his long retyrement, and
sicknes, when he saw him, which was often) much aflickted that hee had
profain'd the scripture, in his playes; and lamented it with horror;
yet, that at that time of his long retyrement, his pentions (so much
as came yn) was giuen to a woman that gouern'd him, with whome he liud
and dyed nere the Abie in West mimster; and that nether he nor she
tooke much care for next weike, and wood be sure not to want wine; of
which he vsually tooke too much before he went to bed, if not oftner
and soner. My lord tells me, he knowes not, but thinks he was borne in
Westminster. The question may be put to Mr. Wood very easily vpon what
grownds he is positiue as to his being borne their? he is a friendly
man and will resolue it. So much for brave Ben. You will not think the
rest so tedyus, as I doe this.

Ffor yoʳ 2 and 3º que. of Mr. Hill and Bilingsley, I doe nether know,
nor can learn any thing worth teling you.

[54]For yʳ two remaining que. of Mr. Warner and Mr.

Harriott, this:--Mr. Warner did long and constantly lodg nere the
water-stares or market in Woolstable (Woolstable is a place or lane not
far from Charing Crosse, and nerer to Northumberland howse). My lord
of Winchester tells me he knew him, and that he saide he first fownd
out the cerculation of the blood, and discover'd it <to> Doʳ Haruie
(who said that 'twas he (himselfe) that found it), for which he is so
memorably famose. Warner had a pention of 40 _li._ a yeare from that
earle of Northumberland that lay so long a prisner in the Towre, and
som alowance from Sir Tho. Alesbery with whome he vsually spent his
sumer in Windesor park, and was welcom, for he was harmless and quet.
His winter was spent at the Wolstable, where he dyed in the time of the
Parliament of 1640, of wᶜʰ, or whome, he was no louer.

Mr. Harriott; my lord tells me, he knew him also: that he was a more
gentile man, then Warner. That he had 120 _li._ a yeare pention from
the said earle (who was a louer of ther studyes) and his lodging in
Syon howse, where he thinks, or beliues, he dyed.

This is all I know or can learne for yoʳ friend; which I wish may be
worth the time and treble of reading it.

                                                                    J. W.

  Nouᵉʳ. 22, 80.

I forgot to tell, that I heard the sermon preacht for the lady Danuers,
and have it: but thanke yʳ ffriend.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[D] An anecdote of Ben Jonson (possibly from some Book of Jests) is
communicated to me by Professor York Powell as still current in Oxford
in oral tradition:--

'One day as Ben Jonson was working at his first trade a fine lady
passed and greeted him--

    "A line and a trowel
    Guide many a fool:
            Good morning, Ben!"
    --"In silk and scarlet
    Walks many a harlot:
            Good morning, Madam!"

answered the poet.'

[E] Aubrey, writing Aug. 7, 1680, in Wood MS. F. 39, fol. 343,
says:--'Pray ask the deane of Welles what countreyman Ben Johnson was.
To my best remembrance I heard him say (1648) Warwickshire; and I have
heard some say that he was of Trinity College Cambridge.'

[F] This is an autograph letter by Izaak Walton, with a heading (here
in italic) added by Aubrey.




=John Kersey= (1616-167-?).


[55]John Kersey, borne at Bodicot in Oxfordshire neer Banbury, anno
domini 1616. Scripsit;--Arithmetique, 8vo; and two volumes of Algebra,
folio.

Obiit in Shandos street, London, neer St. Martin's lane, anno domini
167-. He died of a consumption.

He did survey.




=Ralph Kettell= (1563-1643).


[56]Ralph Kettle, D.D., praeses Coll. Trin. Oxon., was borne at <King's
Langley> in Hertfordshire.

The lady Elizabeth Pope brought him in to be a scholar of the house at
eleaven yeares of age[G] (as I have heard Dr. Ralph Bathurst say).

I have heard Dr. Whistler[57] say that he wrote good Latin, and Dr.
Ralph Bathurst (whose grandmother, ... Villers, he maried), that he
scolded the best in Latin of any one that ever he knew. He was of an
admirable healthy constitution.

He dyed a yeare + after I came to the Colledge, and he was then a
good deale above 80 (quaere aetatem), and he had then a fresh ruddy
complexion. He was a very tall well growne man. His gowne and surplice
and hood being on, he had a terrible gigantique aspect, with his sharp
gray eies. The ordinary gowne he wore was a russet cloath gowne.

He was, they say, white[58] very soon; he had a very venerable
presence, and was an excellent governour. One of his maximes of
governing was to keepe-downe the _juvenilis impetus_[VI.]. He was
chosen President anno Domini <1598/9> the second after the foundation
of the College.

[VI.] 'Tis Seneca's expression.

He was a right Church of England man, and every Tuesday, in terme
time, in the morning, the undergraduates (I have forgott if baccalaurs)
were to come into the chapell and heare him expound on the 36
Articles[59] of the Church of England. I remember he was wont to talke
much of the rood-loft, and of the wafers: he remembred those times. On
these dayes, if any one had committed a fault, he should be sure to
heare of it in the chapell before his fellow collegiates.

<On[60] these days, he would be sure to> have at him that had a white
cap on; for he concluded him to have been drunke, and his head to
ake. Sir[61] John Denham had borrowed money of Mr. Whistler, the
recorder[62], and, after a great while, the recorder askt him for
it again. Mr. Denham laught at it, and told him he never intended
that. The recorder acquainted the President, who, at a lecture in the
chapell, rattled him, and told him, 'Thy father,' (judge[63]) 'haz
hanged many an honester man.' In my time, Mr. Anthony Ettrick and some
others frighted a poor young freshman of Magd. Hall with conjuring,
which when the old Dr. heard of: on the next Tuesday, sayd he, 'Mr.
Ettrick'--who is a very little man--'will conjure up a jackanapes to be
his great-grand-father.'

He sawe how the factious in religion in those dayes drew, and he kept
himselfe unconcerned. W. Laud, archbishop of Canterbury, sent him
one time a servant of his with venison, which the old Dr. with much
earnestnes refused, and sayd that he was an old man, and his stomach
weake, and he had not eaten of such meate in a long time, and by no
meanes would accept of it; but the servant was as much pressing it on
him on the other side, and told the President that he durst not carry
it back[64] againe. Well, seing there was no avoyding it, the President
asked the servant seriously, if the archbishop of Canterbury intended
to putt in any scholars or fellowes[65] into his College?

Mr. ... ... one of the fellowes (in Mr. Francis Potter's time) was
wont to say, that Dr. Kettel's braine was like a _hasty-pudding, where
there was memorie, judgement, and phancy all stirred together_. He
had all these faculties in great measure, but they were all just so
jumbled together. If you had to doe with him, taking him for a foole,
you would have found in him great subtilty and reach: _è contra_, if
you treated with him as a wise man, you would have mistaken him for a
foole. A neighbour of mine (Mr. La<urence> St. Low[H]) told me he heard
him preach once in St. Marie's Church, at Oxon. He began thus: 'being
my turne to preach in this place, I went into my study to prepare my
selfe for my sermon, and I tooke downe a booke that had blew strings,
and look't in it,[66]and 'twas sweet Saint Bernard. I chanced to read
such a part of it, on such a subject, which haz made me to choose this
text----.' I know not whether this was the only time or no that he used
this following way of conclusion:--'But now I see it is time for me to
shutt up my booke, for I see the doctors' men come-in wiping of their
beardes from the ale-house.'--(He could from the pulpit plainly see
them, and 'twas their custome in sermon to go there, and about the end
of sermon to returne to wayte on their masters).

He had two wives, if not three, but no child (quaere). His second wife
was a Villiers, or rather (I thinke) the widowe of ... Villers, esq.,
who had two beautifull daughters, co-heires. The eldest, whom severall
of good estate[67] would gladly have wedded, he would needs dispose of
himselfe, and he thought nobody so fitt a husband for this angelique
creature as one Mr. Bathurst, of the College, a second brother, and of
about 300 _li._ per annum, but an indifferent scholar, red fac'd, not
at all handsome.

But the Doctor's fashion was to goe up and down the college, and peepe
in at the key-holes to see whether the boyes did follow their books or
no. He seldome found Bathurst minding of his booke, but mending of his
old doublet or breeches. He was very thrifty and penurious, and upon
this reason he caried away this curious creature. But she was very
happy in her issue; all her children were ingeniose and prosperous[68]
in the world, and most of them beautifull.

About ... (neer 70 yeares since, I suppose,) one Mr. Isham (elder
brother to Sir Justinian Isham), a gentleman-commoner of this howse,
dyed of the small pox. He was a very fine gentleman, and very well
beloved by all the colledge, and severall of the fellowes would have
preacht his funerall sermon, but Dr. Kettle would not permitt it, but
would doe it himselfe; which the fellowes were sorry for, for they knew
he would make a ridiculous piece of worke of it. But preach the Dr.
did: takes a text and preaches on it a little while; and then takes
another text, for the satisfaction of the young gentleman's mother;
and anon he takes another text, for the satisfaction of the young
gentleman's grandmother. When he came to the panegyrique, sayd he, 'He
was the finest, swet[69] young gentleman; it did doe my heart good
to see him walke along the quadrangle. Wee have an old proverbe that
_Hungry dogges will eate dirty puddings_; but I must needes say for
this young gentleman, that he always loved[VII.] _sweet_'--he spake it
with a squeaking voice--'things,'--and there was an end.

[VII.] They were wont to mock me with this[70].

He observed that the howses that had the smallest beer had most
drunkards, for it forced them to goe into the town to comfort their
stomachs; wherfore Dr. Kettle alwayes had in his College excellent
beer, not better to be had in Oxon; so that we could not goe to any
other place but for the worse, and we had the fewest drunkards of any
howse in Oxford.

He was constantly at lectures and exercises in the hall to observe
them, and brought along with him his hower-glasse; and one time, being
offended at the boyes, he threatned them, that if they would not doe
their exercise better he 'would bring an hower-glass two howers long.'

He was irreconcileable to long haire; called them hairy scalpes, and
as for periwigges (which were then very rarely worne) he beleeved[71]
them to be the scalpes of men cutt off after they were hang'd, and so
tanned and dressed for use. When he observed the scolars' haire longer
then ordinary (especially if they were scholars of the howse), he would
bring a paire of cizers in his muffe (which he commonly wore), and woe
be to them that sate on the outside of the table[I]. I remember he cutt
Mr. Radford's[72] haire with the knife that chipps the bread on the
buttery-hatch, and then he sang (this is in the old play--Henry VIII<'s
time>--of _Grammar[73] Gurton's needle_)

    'And was not Grim the collier finely trimm'd?
                          Tonedi, Tonedi.'

'Mr.[J] Lydall,' sayd he, 'how doe you decline _tondeo_? Tondeo,
tondes, tonedi?'

One time walking by the table where the Logick lecture was read, where
the reader was telling the boyes that a syllogisme might be true _quoad
formam_, but not _quoad materiam_; said the President (who would
putt-in sometimes), 'There was a fox had spyed a crowe upon a tree,
and he had a great mind to have him[74], and so getts under the tree
in a hope, and layes out his tayle crooked like a horne, thinking the
crowe might come and peck at it, and then he would seise him. Now come
we' (this[75] was his word), 'I say the foxe's tayle is a horne: is
this a true proposition or no?' (to one of the boyes). 'Yes,' sayd he
(the Dr. expected he should have sayd No; for it putt him out of his
designe); 'Why then,' said he, 'take him and toot him'; and away he
went.

He dragg'd with one (i.e. right[76]) foot a little, by which he
gave warning (like the rattlesnake) of his comeing. Will. Egerton
(Major-Generall Egerton's younger brother), a good witt and mimick,
would goe so like him, that sometime he would make the whole chapell
rise up, imagining he had been entring in.

As they were reading of inscribing and circumscribing figures, sayd
he,'I will shew you how to inscribe a triangle in a quadrangle. Bring a
pig into the quadrangle, and I will sett the colledge dog at him, and
he will take the pig by the eare; then come I and take the dog by the
tayle, and the hog by the tayle, and so there you have a triangle in a
quadrangle; _quod erat faciendum_.'

He preach't every Sunday at his parsonage at Garsington (about 5 miles
off). He rode on his bay gelding, with his boy Ralph before him, with a
leg of mutton (commonly) and some colledge bread. He did not care for
the countrey revells, because they tended to debauchery. Sayd he, at
Garsington revell, 'Here is Hey for Garsington! and Hey for Cuddesdon!
and Hey Hockly! but here's nobody cries, Hey for God Almighty!'

Upon Trinity Sunday (our festival day) he would commonly preach at the
Colledge, whither a number of the scholars of other howses would come,
to laugh at him. In his prayer (where he was of course to remember Sir
Thomas Pope, our founder, and the lady Elizabeth his wife, deceasd), he
would many times make a willfull mistake, and say, 'Sir Thomas Pope our
_Confounder_[77],' but then presently recall himselfe.

He was a person of great charity. In his college, where he observed
diligent boyes that he ghessed had but a slender exhibition from their
friends, he would many times putt money in at their windowes; that his
right hand did not know what his left did.[78]Servitors that wrote
good hands he would sett on worke to transcribe for him and reward them
generosely, and give them good advise. Mris. Howe, of Grendon, sent
him a present of hippocris, and some fine cheese-cakes, by a plain
countrey fellow, her servant. The Dr. tastes the wine:--'What,' sayd
he, 'didst thou take this drinke[79] out of a ditch?' and when he saw
the cheese-cakes:--'What have we here, _crinkum, crankum_?' The poor
fellow stared on him, and wondered at such a rough reception of such
a handsome present; but he shortly made him amends with a good dinner
and halfe-a-crowne. The parsonage of Garsington (which belongs to the
college) is worth ... per annum, and this good old Doctor, when one of
his parish[80], that was an honest industrious man, happened by any
accident to be in decay and lowe in the world, would let his parsonage
to him for a yeare, two, or three, fourty pounds a yeare under value.

In his younger yeares he had been chaplain to <Thomas> Bilson, bishop
of Winton.

In August, 1642, the lord viscount Say and Seale came (by order of
the Parliament) to visit the colleges, to see what of new Popery they
could discover in the chapells. In our chapell, on the backside of the
skreen, had been two altars (of painting well enough for those times,
and the colours were admirably fresh and lively). That on the right
hand as you enter the chapell was dedicated to St. Katharine, that on
the left was of the taking our Saviour off from the crosse. My lord Say
sawe that this was donne of old time, and Dr. Kettle told his lordship
'Truly, my Lord, we regard them no more then a dirty dish-clout'; so
they remained untoucht, till Harris's time[81], and then were coloured
over with green. The windowes of the chapell were good Gothique
painting, in every columne a figure;--e.g. St. Cuthbert, St. Leonard,
St. Oswald. I have forgott the rest. 'Tis pitty they should be lost.
I have a note of all the scutcheons in glasse about the house. 'Twas
pitty Dr. Bathurst tooke the old painted glasse out of the library.
Anciently, in the chapell, was a little organ over the dore of the
skreen. The pipes were, in my time, in the bursery.

[82]Memorandum:--till Oxford was surrendred we sang the reading psalmes
on Sundayes, holy-dayes, and holy-day eves; and one of the scholars
of the house sang the ghospell for the day in the hall, at the latter
end of dinner, and concluded, _Sic desinit Evangelium secundum beatum
Johannem_ (or etc.): _tu autem, Domine, miserere nostri_.

He <Kettle> sang a shrill high treble; but there was one (J.
Hoskyns[K]) who had a higher, and would play the wag with the Dr. to
make him straine his voice up to his.

[83]Memorandum:--there was in my time a rich pall[84] to lay on a
coffin, of crimson velvet, with a large plaine crosse on it of white
silke or sattin.

[85]'Tis probable this venerable Dr. might have lived some yeares
longer, and finisht his century, had not those civill warres come on:
which much grieved him, that was wont to be absolute in the colledge,
to be affronted and disrespected by rude soldiers. I remember, being
at the Rhetorique lecture in the hall, a foot-soldier came in and[86]
brake his hower-glasse. The Dr. indeed was just stept out, but Jack
Dowch[L] pointed at it. Our grove was the Daphne for the ladies
and their gallants to walke in, and many times my lady Isabella
Thynne[VIII.] would make her entrey with a theorbo or lute played
before her. I have heard her play on it in the grove myselfe, which she
did rarely; for which Mr. Edmund Waller hath in his Poems for ever made
her famous. One may say of her as Tacitus sayd of Agrippina, _Cuncta
alia illi adfuere, praeter animum honestum_. She was most beautifull,
most humble, charitable, etc. but she could not subdue one thing. I
remember one time this lady and fine Mris. Fenshawe[IX.] (her great
and intimate friend, who lay at our college), would have a frolick to
make a visitt to the President. The old Dr. quickly perceived that
they came to abuse him; he addresses his discourse to Mris. Fenshawe,
saying, 'Madam, your husband[M] and father I bred up here, and I knew
your grandfather; I know you to be a gentlewoman, I will not say you
are a whore; but gett you gonne for a very woman.' The dissolutenesse
of the times, as I have sayd, grieving the good old Doctor, his dayes
were shortned, and dyed <July> anno Domini 1643, and was buried at
Garsington: quaere his epitaph.

[VIII.] <She> lay at Balliol College.

[IX.] She was wont, and my lady Thynne, to come to our Chapell,
mornings, halfe dressd, like angells.

Seneca's scholar Nero found fault with his style, saying 'twas _arena
sine calce_: now Dr. Kettle was wont to say that 'Seneca writes, as a
boare does pisse,' scilicet, by jirkes.

I cannot forget a story that Robert Skinner, lord bishop of Oxford,
haz told us:--one Slymaker[N], a fellow of this College long since,
a fellow of great impudence, and little learning--the fashion was in
those dayes to goe, every Satterday night (I thinke), to Joseph Barnes'
shop, the bookeseller (opposite to the west end of St. Mary's), where
the newes was brought from London, etc.--this impudent clowne would
alwayes be hearkning to people's whisperings and overlooking their
letters, that he was much taken notice of. Sir Isaac Wake, who was
a very witty man, was resolved he would putt a trick upon him, and
understood that such a Sunday Slymaker was to preach at St. Mary's. So
Sir Isaac, the Saterday before, reades a very formall lettre to some
person of quality, that cardinal Baronius was turned Protestant, and
was marching with an army of 40,000 men against the Pope. Slymaker
hearkned with greedy eares, and the next day in his prayer before
his sermon[O], beseeched God[87]'of his infinite mercy and goodnesse
to give a blessing to the army of cardinall Baronius, who was turnd
Protestant, and now marching with an army of forty thousand men,'
and so runnes on: he had a Stentorian voice, and thunderd it out. The
auditors all stared and were amazed: ... Abbot (afterwards bishop of
Sarum[88]) was then Vice-cancellor, and when Slymaker came out of the
pulpit, sends for him, and asked his name: 'Slymaker,' sayd he; 'No,'
sayd the Vice-canc., ''tis _Lyemaker_.'

Dr. Kettle, when he scolded at the idle young boies of his colledge, he
used these names, viz. _Turds_, _Tarrarags_ (these were the worst sort,
rude rakells), _Rascal-Jacks_, _Blindcinques_, _Scobberlotchers_ (these
did no hurt, were sober, but went idleing about the grove with their
hands in their pocketts, and telling the number of the trees there, or
so).

[89]To make you merry I'le tell you a story that Dr. Henry Birket[90]
told us tother day at his cosen <Thomas> Mariet's, scilicet that about
1638 or 1640 when he was of Trinity College, Dr. Kettle, preaching
as he was wont to doe on Trinity Sunday, told 'em that they should
keepe their bodies chast and holy: 'but,' said he, 'you fellows of the
College here eate good commons and drinke good double-beer ... and that
will gett-out.' How would the good old Dr. have raunted and beat-up his
kettle-drum, if he should have seen such luxury in the College as there
is now! Tempora mutantur.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[G] It is difficult to decide whether these personal traditions are
accurate or not. By the College records it appears that 'Ralph Kettell,
Hertfordshire, aged _sixteen_, was elected scholar of Trinity 16 June
1579.' But he _may_ have been in residence earlier. He was elected
fellow May 30, 1583; and admitted _third_ president Feb. 12, 1598/9. He
died in July, 1643.

[H] Laurence Saintloe was B.A. from Exeter College Nov. 14, 1623:
probably of the Saintlowes of Wiltshire.

[I] In College halls, till modern increase of numbers brought in more
tables to block the floor, there were only the high table on the daïs,
and side-tables along the walls of the body of the hall. The inner
seats for these were often part of the wainscotting, and in any case
there would be no passage behind them.

[J] John Lydall, scholar of Trinity College, June 4, 1640: Aubrey's
particular friend, died Oct. 12, 1657 (Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_,
i. 229). Aubrey often refers to him in his letters, generally with some
expression of deep sorrow.

[K] John Hoskins of Rampisham, Dorset, elected Scholar of Trinity, May
28, 1635, aged 16; Fellow June 4, 1640.

[L] John Douch, matric. at Trin. July 5, 1639, aged 16: afterwards
rector of Stalbridge, Dorset.

[M] John Fanshawe of Dagenham, Essex, matric. at Trin. Coll. Feb. 9,
1637/8, aged 18.

[N] Henry Slymaker, of Oxford city, aged 18, elected Scholar of Trin.
May 26, 1592; Fellow June 13, 1598.

[O] It would be interesting to know when the 'bidding prayer' became
a form, as it now is, and ceased to be composed for the occasion. See
a notice of this prayer being habitually used to express personal
opinions in 1637, in Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, ii. 238.




=Ludolph van Keulen= (1554?-1610).


[91]Ludolphus van Ceulin was first, by profession, a fencing-master;
but becomeing deafe, he betooke himselfe to the studie of the
mathematiques wherin he became famous.

He wrote a learned booke, printed at ... in 4to of the proportion
of the diameter of a circle to the peripherie: before which is his
picture, and round about it in the compartiment are swords and bucklers
and holberts, etc.,--weapons: the reason wherof I understood not till
Dʳ. John Pell gave the aforesaid account, who had it from Sir Francis
Godolphin, who had been his scholar as to fencing and boarded in his
house.

He dyed at Leyden anno ..., aetat. 56, as I remember (vide); and on
his monument, according to his last will, is engraved the proportion
abovesayd, which is....




=Richard Kitson.=


[92]My lodging is at the George Inne in Little Drury lane, very
early or late, or at other times at Mr. Samuell Eyres his chamber
at Lincolne's Inne or at Mr. John Hancock's chamber in the Middle
Temple--Ric. Kitson.

Direct your letter in the country to me at my house in Amesbury neere
Salisbury, Wiltes.

I use to be at Salisbury Tuesdayes and Saturdayes weekely--R. K.




=Richard Knolles= (154- -1610).


[93]<The> author of the battaile of Lepanto[94] <was> hangd at Tyburne;
he was reduced to such necessity.

The lord Burleigh, when he read <Richard> Knolls' Turkish history was
particularly extremely pleased at the discription of the battail of
Lepanto; sent for Knolles, who told him an ingeniose young man came
to him, hearing what he was about, and desired that he might write
that, having been in that action. I thinke he has taught schoole about
Sandwych.

My lord hunted after him, and traced him from place to place, and at
last to Newgate. He was hanged but a 14 night before. He unluckily lost
a good opportunity of being preferred--<from> Mr. Smyth, Magd. Coll.




=John Lacy= (16-- -1681).


[95]John Lacy, player, of the King's house, borne at ... neer Doncaster
in Yorkshire. Came to London to the ... playhouse, 1631. His master
was.... Apprentice (as were also ... and Isaac) to Mr. John Ogilby.

B. Jonson tooke a note of his Yorkshire words and proverbes for his
_Tale of a Tub_, several 'Gad kettlepinns!'

1642 vel 3, lievetenant and quartermaster to the lord Gerard[96]. Vide
Dr. Earles' Character of a Player.

He was of an elegant shape, and fine[97] complexion.

His majestie (Charles IIᵈ) haz severall pictures of this famous
comoedian at Windsore and Hampton Court in the postures of severall
parts that he acted, e.g., Teag, Lord Vaux, the Puritan.

He dyed of.... He made his _exit_ on Saturday September 17th 1681, and
was buryed in the farther churchyard of St. Martyn's in the fields on
the Monday following, aged....

_Scripsit_ these comoedies: that is to say,

                                  ...
                                  ...




=Edward Lane= (1605-1685).


[98]Edward Lane, who wrote against ... Du Moulin[P]: the title of his
booke is ..., London, printed for W. Crooke, A.D....

In a letter from him to Mr. Crooke, thus, viz.:--

'As to the postscript of your letter, wherein I am desired to give
an account of my academicall education, etc., know that in the yeare
1622, after I had been brought up to some learning in Paule's Schoole,
London, I was admitted into St. John's Colledge, in Cambridge, where
the president was my tutor; and after I had duely performed all that
was required of me both in College and Schooles, I tooke my degree
there of Master in Arts in the yeare 1629. And ten yeares after that,
viz. in the yeare 1639, I was admitted _ad eundem gradum_ in the
university of Oxford. In the yeare 1630, my Lord Keeper Coventrey gave
<me> a little vicarage in Essex, called North Strobury; and in the
yeare 1635 his good Lordship removed me to the place where I now am.
This I concieve is all that is now enquired of me by you.--The Lord
give me grace so to number my dayes that I may apply my heart better
then I have yet donne to Spiritual Wisdome.

                                 Good sir,
                                       I am your true friend and servant,
                                                   EDWARD LANE.'

  Sparsholt, Hants.
    Novemb. 16, 1681.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[P] In 1680 Lewis du Moulin published a pamphlet, 'Moral reflections
upon the number of the elect, proving ... that ... probably not one in
a million from Adam down to our time shall be saved.' Lane's answer
appeared in the same year:--'Mercy triumphant: the kingdom of Christ
enlarged beyond the narrow bounds which have been put to it by Dr. L.
du Moulin....'




=Sir Henry Lee= (1530-1610/1).

=Sir Henry Lee= (15-- -1631).


[99]Sir Henry Lee of Ditchley in com. Oxon was a gentleman of a good
estate, and a strong and valiant person.

He was raunger of Woodstocke parke, and (I have heard my old cosen
Whitney say) would many times in his younger yeares walke at nights in
the parke with his keepers.

Sir Gerard Fleetwood succeeded him in this place[X.]; as his nephew Sir
William Fleetwood did him, and him the earl of Rochester.

[X.] J. S. on the heroicall epistles of Michael Drayton--'In Rosamund's
time, one Vaughan.'

This Sir Henry Lee's nephew and heire (whom I remember very well;
he often came to Sir John Danvers') was called _Whip-and-away_. The
occasion of it was thus:--this old hero declining in his strength
by age and so not being able to be a righter of his owne wronges as
heretofore--

    Labitur occiduae per iter declive senectae.
    Subruit haec aevi demoliturque prioris
    Robora. Fletque Milo senior cum spectat inanes
    Illos, qui fuerant solidorum more tororum
    Herculeis similes, fluidos pendere lacertos.

             OVID. _Metamorp._ lib. xv, fab. 3 <l. 227>--

some person of quality had affronted him. So he spake to Sir Henry Lee
his heire to lie in wayte for him about the Bell Inne in the Strand
with halfe a dozen or more lustie fellowes at his back and as the
partie passed along to give him a good blow with his cane and _whip
and away_, the tall fellowes should finish the revenge. Whether 'twere
nicety of conscience or cowardice, but Sir Henry the younger absolutely
refused it. For which he was disinherited, and <Sir Henry the elder>
setled his whole estate upon a keeper's sonne of Whitchwood-forest of
his owne name, a one-eied young man, no kinne to him, from whom the
earle of Lichfield[100] now is descended, as also the lady Norris and
lady Wharton.

He was never maried, but kept woemen to reade to him when he was a
bed. One of his readers was parson Jones[101] his wife of Wotton. I
have heard her daughter (who had no more witt) glory what a brave
reader her mother was and how Sir Harry's worship much delighted to
heare her. But his dearest deare was Mris. Anne Vavasour. He erected a
noble altar monument of marble (☞ see it) wheron his effigies in armour
lay; at the feet was the effigies of his mistresse Mris. Anne Vavasour.
Which occasioned these verses:--

    Here lies good old knight Sir Harry,
    Who loved well, but would not marry[102]....

Memorandum: some bishop did threaten to have this monument defaced (at
least to remove Mris. A. Vavasour's effigies).


<_Pedigree of the Lees of Ditchley._>

[103](1) Old Sir Henry Lee[104] of Ditchley, com. Oxon.

(2) Sir Henry Lee, whom they called _Whip-and-away_, was cosen-german
to the other Sir Henry; he dyed a batchelor, sine prole.

  (3) Sir Henry Lee[105], _m._ Elenor Wortley, whose
  with one eie, a          |   mother was countesse
  keeper's son,            |   of Dover.
  adopted by old           |
  Sir Henry.               |
                           |
                 Harry[106] Lee _m._ <Anne> St. John, ... daughter
                                 |   of Sir John St. John, of Lydiard
                                 |   Tregoze, Wilts; now countess
                                 |   of Rochester.
                                 |
                          Harry Lee[107] _m._ Anne Danvers, second daughter of
                                          |   Sir John Danvers, brother and
                                          |   heire of Henry, earl of Danby.
          +-------------------------------+-------+
          |                                       |
  <Eleanor> Lee _m._ James, lord Norris     <Anne> Lee _m._ <Thomas> eldest
                 |   of Ricot, since earl                   son of the lord
                 |   of Abingdon.                           Wharton.
                 |
        +--------+------+-------+---+---+
        |               |       |   |   |
  1. Montagu, now   2. James.   3   4   5
  lord Norris.

Old Sir Henry Lee, knight of the Garter, and was supposed brother of
queen Elizabeth. He ordered that all his family should be christned
_Harry's_.

This account I take from my lady Elizabeth viscountesse Purbec, the
eldest daughter of Sir John Danvers, sister to the lady Anne Lee.

 [108]One-eied Lee[109] _m._ <Anne> St. John _m._ <Henry>, lord Wilmot.
                         |                    |
                         |                 <John>, earl of Rochester.
                         |
        ... _m._ <Sir Henry> Lee _m._ Anne Danvers
             |                    |
  earl of Litchfield[110].  +-----+--------+
                            |              |
                       Lady Norris.   Lady Wharton.




=William Lee= (15-- -1610).


[111]Mr. William Lee, A.M., was of Oxon[112] (I thinke, Magdalen
Hall[Q]). He was the first inventor of the weaving of stockings by an
engine of his contrivance. He was a Sussex man borne, or els lived
there. He was a poor curate, and, observing how much paines his wife
tooke in knitting a payre of stockings, he bought a stocking and a
halfe, and observed the contrivance of the stitch, which he designed
in his loome, which (though some of the appendent instruments of the
engine be altered) keepes the same to this day. He went into France,
and there dyed before his loome was made there. So the art was, not
long since, in no part of the world but England. Oliver Protector made
an act that it should be felonie to transport this engine. Vide Stowe's
Chronicle and Baker's Chronicle, if any mention of it. This information
I tooke from a weaver (by this engine) in Pear-poole lane, 1656. Sir
John Hoskyns, Mr. Stafford Tyndale, and I, went purposely to see it.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[Q] In MS. Aubr. 8. fol. 4, Anthony Wood notes:--'11 Nov. 1681:--"John
Lee, Surrey, son of Thomas Lee, of London, gent., aet. 17, 1624"
<matriculated at> "Aul. Magd."--this I set here because one Lee is
mentioned in this book,--see page 18,' i.e. fol. 32 as above.




=William Lilly= (1601-1681).


[113]W. Lilly--<life> donne by himselfe penes Mr. Elias Ashmole.

[114]Mr. W. Lilly obiit at his house in Hersham, Thursday, June 9,
and is to be buried at Walton chancel[115] this day, scil. June 10,
1681. He was borne on May day 1601[116]: had he lived till next May he
had been full fourscore. He setled his estate at Hersham, 200 _li._
per annum, on ... Whitlock, esqre, sonne of the Lord Commissioner
Whitlock[117] (who was his great patrone).

[118]Mr. William Lilly, astrologer: he wrote his owne life very
largely, which Elias Ashmole, esq., hath. Memorandum he predicted the
great comete which appeared in anno Domini[119] 168<0>, in his almanack
1677, which was the last that he wrote himselfe with his owne hands;
for afterwards he fell blind. Memorandum, to bind up the almanack
aforesayd with other 8vo pamphlets, for 'tis exceeding considerable.

                  [120]Ne oblivione contereretur urna
                            Gulielmi Lillii
                         astrologi peritissimi
                           qui fatis cessit
                  Vᵗᵒ Idus Junii anno Christi Juliano
                               MDCLXXXI
                   Hoc illi posuit amoris monumentum
                            Elias Ashmole,
                               armiger.

On a black marble (good marble; 7 _li._[121]) gravestone in the middle
towards the north wall of Walton-on-Thames <church>.

Quaere--he wrote his own life which Mr. Ashmole hath and is dedicated
to him.




=Franciscus Linus.=


[122]Father Franciscus Linus, i.e. Hall, was borne in London--which
captain Robert Pugh, è Societate Jesus, assured me, who was his great
acquaintance.

He was of the Societie of Jesus and lived most at Liège, where he
dyed....

He writt a learned discourse, _de coloribus_, which Sir Kenelm Digby
quotes with much praise in his philosophie.

He printed a discourse of dialling in 4to, Latin, and made the Jesuits
College there the finest dialls in the world, which are described in
that booke. The like dialls he made (which resemble something a ... of
candlesticks) in the garden at Whitehall, which were one night, anno
Dni. 167- (4[123], as I take it), broken all to pieces (for they were
of glasse spheres) by the earl of Rochester, lord Buckhurst, Fleetwood
Shephard, etc., comeing in from their revells. 'What!' said the earl
of Rochester, 'doest thou stand here to ... time?' Dash they fell to
worke. Ther was a watchman alwayes stood there to secure it.

He wrote a piece of philosophy in Latin in 8vo, called....

He had great skill in the optiques, and was an excellent philosopher
and mathematician, and a person of exceeding suavity, goodnes, and
piety, insomuch that I have heard father Manners, è Soc. Jes., say that
he deserved canonisation.

Memorandum--he writ a little tract, about halfe a sheet or not much
more, of Transubstantiation, proveing it metaphysically and by naturall
reason--which I have seen.

[124]Franciscus Linus (Hall), Jesuite, at Leige. He told me he was born
in London; see more in my memorandums of him to Mr. Anthony Wood.

Sir Kenelme Digby, in his booke of bodies, in the chapter of colours,
speakes with a very great respect of Mr. ... Hall.

He writ and published a prety little booke in 8vo (or lesse) of
natural philosophy--quaere nomen.




=Sir Matthew Lister= (1564-1656).


[125]Sir Matthew Lister was born at Thornton in Craven in Yorkshire.
His nephew Martin Lister, M.D., R.S.S.[126], from whose mouth I have
this information, tells me he was of Oriel College in Oxon; he thinkes
he was a fellowe.

He built that stately house at Ampthill in Bedfordshire (now the earle
of Alesbury's). He sent for the architects from Italie.

He died at Burwell neer Lowth in Lincolnshire about 1656 or 1657, aged
92 yeares.

He was physitian to queen Anne (queen of king James). See the list of
the names of the physitians before _the London dispensatorie_; as I
remember, he was then president of the Physitians' College at London.

He printed nothing that Dr. Martin Lister knowes of (Sir Matthew Lister
bred him up).

[127]Mr. <Edmund> Wyld sayes Sir Matthew Lister built the house for
Mary, countesse of Pembroke. He was her surveyour, and managed her
estate[128]. The seat at Ampthill is now in the possession of the earl
of Alesbury, whose grandfather (the earl of Elgin) bought it of the
countesse of Pembroke.--That he was president of the Physitians College
appeares by the dedication of the London dispensatory to him, being
then president.




=Evans Lloyd.=


[129]1582: Almanack, supputated specially for the elevation and
meridian of London but may generally serve for all England--by Evans
Lloyd, student in Astronomie.

'Tis dedicated 'To the right honourable Sir Thomas Bromley, Lord
Chancellour of England, and one of her majestie's most honourable
privy councell.' He concludes thus:--'Your honour's most humble and
dutifull, Evans Lloyd, late student in Oriall Colledge in Oxford.'




=Martin Lluelyn= (1616-1681/2).


[130]Martin Lluellyn was borne on Thursday the 12 of December 1616,
a quarter befor 11 of clock in the night, the moon newly entred into
Capricorn and near the full in Gemini. He was the seventh son, without
any daughter between. He was christned on the 22 day of December at
Litle St. Bartholomeu's church near Smithfeild, London: buried in the
left chancel of Wicombe church near the wall.

    Our faith and duty, pure without allay,
    As our Apollo we our kings obey,
    To both implicit homag allways pay.
    When the God moves we seldom reasoning stand,
    But feareless march wherere he does command.
    And thus we treat all mortall majesty
    And never put the saucy question, Why?

[131]He lies interred in the middle of the north aisle of the chancell,
towards the step or elevation, of Chipping Wickham in the county of
Bucks, under a fair black marble gravestone.




=Sir James Long= (1613-1658/9).


[132]Sir James Long, baronet:--I should now be both orator and soldier
to give this honoured friend of mine, 'a gentleman absolute[133] in all
numbers,' his due character.

Only son of Sir W. L.; borne at South Wraxhall in Wilts. Westminster
scholar; of Magd. coll. Oxon; Fisher there. Went to France. Maried
anno ... D.[134] Leech, a most elegant beautie and witt, daughter of
Sir E. L., 25 aetat. In the civill warres, colonel of horse in Sir
Fr. Dodington's brigade. Good sword-man; horseman; admirable extempore
orator pro harangue; great memorie; great historian and romanceer;
great falkoner and for horsemanship; for insects; exceeding curious and
searching long since, in naturall things.

Oliver, Protector, hawking at Hownselowe heath, discoursing with him,
fell in love with his company, and commanded him to weare his sword,
and to meete him a hawkeing, which made the strict cavaliers look on
him with an evill eye.

Scripsit 'History and Causes of the Civill Warre,' or 'Reflections'
(quaere); 'Examination of witches at Malmesburie.'


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

MS. Aubr. 3, fol. 187, is a coloured sketch by Aubrey of Sir James Long
of Draycot and himself hawking; fol. 189 is Aubrey's pencil drawing for
it.




=Richard Lovelace= (1618-1658).


[135]Richard Lovelace[R], esq.: he was a most beautifull gentleman.

            Geminum, seu lumina, sydus,
    Et dignos Baccho digitos, et Apolline crines,
    Impubesque genas, et eburnea colla, decusque
    Oris, et in niveo mistum candore ruborem.

         OVID. _Metamorph._[136] fab. 5 (Echo), lib. III.

Obiit in a cellar in Long Acre, a little before the restauration of
his majestie. Mr. Edmund Wyld, etc. have made collections for him, and
given him money.

One of the handsomst men of England. He was of ... in Kent, 500 _li._
per annum and + (quaere E. W.).

He was an extraordinary handsome man, but prowd. He wrote a poem called
_Lucasta_[XI.], 8vo, printed London by Thomas Harper to be sold at the
Gun in Ivy lane, 1649[137].

[XI.] Lucasta, Posthumous Poems of Richard Lovelace, esq., with verses
of severall of his friends on him: 8vo.

He was of Glocester hall[138], as I have been told.

He had two younger brothers, viz. colonel Francis Lovelace, and
another brother <William> that died at Carmarthen (prout per poema).

George Petty, haberdasher, in Fleet Street, carried xx_s._ to him every
Monday morning from Sir ... Many and Charles Cotton, esq., for ...
(quaere quot) moneths, but was never repayd[S].


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[R] In MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5, is the note:--'Let me see colonel
Lovelace's life to insert some verses;' i.e. Aubrey asks back from
Anthony Wood MS. Aubr. 8, to insert 'some verses.' This seems not to
have been done, unless they be those quoted from Ovid.

[S] The meaning seems to be that these two commissioned Petty to pay
Lovelace a weekly allowance, but never re-paid him. Is 'Sir ... Many'
Sir John Mennis? George Petty was a distant connexion of Anthony Wood:
Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, i. 35.




=Cyprian Lucar.=


[139]Mr. Cyprian Lucar[T] published a very profitable treatise in 4to
for young beginners in the Mathematicks, intituled

'Lucar solace, divided into fower bookes, which in part are collected
out of diverse authors in diverse languages, and in part devised by
Cyprian Lucar, gentleman. Imprinted at London by Richard Field anno
Domini 1590.'

It is dedicated 'to the right worshipfull his brother-in-law Maister
William Roe, esquier, and alderman of the honorable citie of London.'
This dedicatory epistle is a well writ and close stile. He expresseth
himselfe short and cleare and to have been a publick-spirited and a
good man as well as learned and ingenious. He dates it 'From my house
in London the 1 day of May in the yeare of the creation of the world
5552, and in the yeare of our redemption 1590.'

The contents of the four bookes of Lucar Solace:--

'The first book containeth definitions of divers words and terms, names
and lengthes of divers English measures, the true difference between
an acar of land measured with a pearch of 12 foot, 18 foot, 20 foote,
or 24 foote in length, and an acar of land measured with a pearch
of 16 foot and an halfe foote in length, names and types of divers
geometrical instruments, names and dwelling places of workmen which
can make and doe sell such instruments, meanes to discerne whether
or no the edge of a ruler is right, and infallible instructions by
which an ingenious reader may readily measure upon any smooth table,
drummes head, stoole or other superficies measurable lengths, bredthes,
heights, and depthes, apply known lengthes, bredthes, heights, and
depthes to many good purposes, know recorded heighthes, lengthes, and
bredthes of some famous monuments in Sarum, in Westminster and in the
honorable citie of London, know the antiquitie of the sayd citie of
London, draw the true plat of any place, make a fit scale for any platt
or mappe, reduce many plats into one fair mappe, reduce a mappe from a
bigge forme to a lesse forme, and from a lesse forme to a bigge forme,
and learne to know the commodities and discommodities of places.

[140]'The second book sheweth how an ingenuous person may measure a
right-lined distance between any two places described in a mappe, how
he may measure the circuite and superficiall content of any described
peece of land, how he may find the centre of any polygonon equiangle
figure, how he may find the center of any circle, how he may make by a
part of the circumference the whole circumference agreeing unto that
part, how he may bring any right lined figure into triangles and how he
may know what number of angles in a right-lined figure are equall to
any certain number of right angles.

'The third book instructeth the reader to make any triangle, square, or
long-square, to erect a plumbe line upon any part or point of a line,
to divide any circle into divers numbers of equall parts, to make any
polygonon equiangle figure, to make an egge-forme figure, to know when
a figure is inscribed within another figure or circumscribed about
another figure, to inscribe certain rightlined figures within certain
other rightlined figures, to circumscribe certain rightlined figures
about certain other rightlined figures, to divide a right line into
so many equall parts as he will, to tell whether a thing seen afar
off doth stand still, goe from him, or come towards him, to draw a
line equall to any assigned arch-line or to the whole circumference
of any assigned circle or to any assigned part of a circle, to draw a
circular line equall to any assigned right line, to separate, lay out,
and inclose within a long square, one, two or three acars of land by
diverse waies from any peece of ground adjoyning, to change a figure of
one forme into an equall figure of another appointed forme, to make a
right line angle equall to a right line angle given, to draw a parallel
to a right line given, and to cube any assigned sphere.

'The fourth booke teacheth the reader to know fruitfull barren and
minerall grounds, growthes ages and solid contents of trees, and
where a good air is. It doth also teach the reader to build for the
preservation of health, to make a tunnell of a chimney so as no smoak
shall annoy him in his house, to fell timber and make sound boords for
buildings, to sink a well in due time and in a place where water may
be found, and to know whether a new found spring of water will drie
up in a hot and dry summer; also it sheweth how water in a shallow
well is more wholesome than water in a deep well, how every well ought
to be uncovered[141]and often times drawn drie, how the use of water
is necessary, how divers sorts of water have divers qualities, how
there are divers meanes to trie among many sorts of water which water
is best, how great store of water may be thrown out of a new-devised
squerte upon any fired house or other thing, how water may be brought
in pipes or in gutters within the ground to any appointed sesterne,
how the depth of any sea may be found, how the force of running waters
which weare away land may be broken; how wet grounds and bogges may
be drained, and how by the art taught in these 4 bookes the ingenuous
reader may devise new workes, strange engins and instruments not only
for private pleasure but also for sundry purposes in the common-wealth.'

Memorandum:--in the XXIII chapter of the third booke of Lucar Solace,
in the beginning of the chapter, he quotes the 67 chapter of his booke
☞ intituled Lucar appendix, which I never saw.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[T] Aubrey gives in trick the coat, '..., a chevron between 3 trefoils
slipped ..., a crescent for difference,' and then scores it out, adding
'this is Roe's coate.' Then he has given as Lucar's coat:--'..., a
chevron between 3 nags' heads erased bridled ...; quartering, ...
a fess nebulé, in chief a lion's head erased between 2 mascles, in
base a mascle.' He adds that the motto is 'In spe,' and 'the crest is
a lure for a hawke held in one's hand.'--Cyprian Lucar, of London,
adm. probationer of New College, Dec. 20, 1561, and adm. Fellow July
25, 1563, vacated his fellowship in 1565.--Mark Lucar, probably his
brother, of St. Botolph's parish, London, was admitted prob. of New
Coll., Aug. 16, 1570; Fellow March 30, 1572, resigned 1575; and took
B.A. on May 24, 1574.




=Henry Lyte= (1529(?)-1607).


[142]I will enquire at Lyte's-Cary when Henry Lyte[143], esq.,
dyed.--He translated Dodantus' _Herball_, and writt a little pamphlet,
which I have, called '_The light of Britaine_, being a short summary of
the old English history,' dedicated to queen Elizabeth.

He began the genealogy of king James, derived from Brute; which his
eldest son Thomas Lyte, of Lyte's-Cary aforesaid, finished, and
presented to king James. It is most rarely donne and exquisitly limmed
by a limmer--all the kings' pictures, etc. King James, after it had
hung some time at Whitehal, ordered him to have it[144]again and to
gett <it> ingraved, which was donne. Mr. Humble of Pope's-head alley
had the plates before the fire: I hope they are not lost--it is most
curiously donne, by Hole. It is as big as the greatest map of England
that ever I sawe. Mr. Camden much admired, and at the foot writt 6 or 8
verses with his owne hand:--

    Artificemne manum laudem celebremne labores,
    Lyte, tuos: hi namque docent delectat at illa,

etc.--which I have forgott.

T. Lyte writt the best print hand that ever I yet sawe. The originall,
which is now in the parlour at Lyte's-Cary, was writt with his hand,
and limmed by a famous artist.

[145]They[146] both lye buried in a burying place belonging to them in
the church at Charlton Makerell in Somersetshire.

[147]Henry Lyte lived to the age of 78, and was buried in the north
aisle of the church of Charlton Makarell in Somersetshire anno
1607--which aisle belongs to Lyte's-Cary.




=Isaac Lyte= (1576/7-1659/60).


[148]Mr. Isaac Lyte, of Easton-Piers, my honoured grand-father, was
born there March XIX, 1576; hora ignoratur. Baptizatus March XIX,
1576--ex registro.

Obiit Febr. 21, 1659, die Martis[149], circiter horam quartam mane.

Mris Israel Lyte, my honoured grandmother, died Febr. 24, 1661/2, inter
horas 3 et 4 P.M.




=Sir John Mandeville.=


[150]☞ Captain Robert Pugh[151] assures me that Sir John Mandeville,
the famous traveller, lyes buryed at Liege in Germany, with which note
amend lib. B[152], where I thought he had been buryed at St. Alban's
abbey church as Mr. Thomas Gore told me. But I thinke I remember
something writt of him there in a table on a pillar or wall: but he was
there borne (as in his life).




=Gervase Markham= (1568-1637).


[153]Mr. ... Markham: he wrote of husbandry and huswifry, 4to; of
horsemanship, 4to; of the art of shooting with the long bow, 8vo;
etc.--quaere.

He was a Nottinghamshire gentleman. His brother Sir Gryffin Markham was
servant to the emperor ..., and did deserve well of him.

This ... Markham, the writer, dyed poor.--Old Jack Markham (late
gentleman-usher to the queen) from whom I have these informations told
me he hath given <him> many a crowne.




=William Marshall= (1606-16--).


[154]William Marshall, sculptor, natus Oct. 7, horâ 0 min. 23 P.M.,
1606.--Conjunction of Mercury and Leo made him stammer.




=Sir Henry Martin= (1562-1641).


[155]Sir Henry Martin, LL.D., was borne at Stoke-Poges in the countie
of Bucks; his father a copy-holder there of about 60 _li._ per annum.
He was formerly a fellow of New Colledg, Oxon. He left his sonne 3000
_li._ per annum.

[156]H. Martyn.--his father <Sir Henry> has a handsome monument at
Becket in Berks which he purchased of Sir ... Essex.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

Henry Martyn, of the parish of 'S. Michael in Basingeshall,' London,
was adm. probationer of New College, Aug. 19, 1580, and Fellow July 6,
1582; vacated his fellowship in 1595. He was Judge of the Admiralty,
Dean of the Arches, and Judge of the Prerogative Court of Canterbury.
Aubrey (MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 12ᵛ) gives for his coat, 'argent, 2 bars
gules, each charged with 3 besants.'




=Henry Martin= (1602-1680).


[157]Henry Martin, esq., son and heir of Sir Henry Martin, knight,
Judge of the Arches, was borne at <Oxford>.

Henry, the son, was of the university of <Oxford[158]>; travelled
France, but never Italie. His father found out a rich wife for him,
whom he married something unwillingly. He was a great lover of pretty
girles, to whom he was so liberall that he spent the greatest part of
his estate.

When he had found out a maried woman[159] that he liked (and he had his
emissaries, male and female, to looke out) he would contrive such or
such a good bargain, 20 or 30 _li._ per annum under rent, to have her
neer him. He lived from his wife a long time. If I am not mistaken shee
was sometime distempered by his unkindnesse to her.

King Charles I had complaint against him for his wenching. It happened
that Henry was in Hyde-parke one time when his majestie was there,
goeing to see a race. The king espied him, and sayd aloud, 'Let that
ugly rascall be gonne out of the parke, that whore-master, or els I
will not see the sport.' So Henry went away patiently, _sed manebat
alta mente repostum_. That sarcasme raysed the whole countie of Berks
against him[160]: he[161] was as far from a Puritane as light from
darknesse. Shortly after[162], (1641) he was chosen knight of the shire
of that county, _nemine contradicente_, and proved a deadly enemy to
the king.

He was a great and faithfull lover of his countrey, and never gott
a farthing by the Parliament. He was of an incomparable witt for
reparte's; not at all covetous; humble, not at all arrogant, as most of
them were; a great cultor of justice, and did always in the house take
the part of the oppressed.

Anno 1660 he was obnoxious for having been one of the late king's
judges, and he was in very great danger to have suffred as the others
did (he pleaded only the king's Act or Proclamation at Breda, which
he shewd in his hand), but (as he was a witt himselfe) so the lord
Falkland saved his life by witt, saying, 'Gentlemen, yee talke here
of makeing a sacrifice; it was the old lawe[163], all sacrifices were
to be without spott or blemish; and now you are going to make an old
rotten rascall a sacrifice.' This witt tooke in the house, and saved
his life.

He was first a prisoner at the Tower; then at Windsore (removed from
thence because he was an eie-sore to his majestie etc.); from thence
to Chepstowe, where he is now (1680). During his imprisonment his wife
relieved him out of her joincture, but she dyed....

His stature was but midling; his habit moderate; his face not good. Sir
Edward Baynton was wont to say that his company was incomparable, but
that he would be drunke too soon.

His speeches in the house were not long, but wondrous poynant,
pertinent, and witty. He was exceeding happy in apt instances. He alone
haz sometimes turned the whole house. Makeing an invective speech one
time against old Sir Henry Vane, when he had don with him, <he> said,
_But for young Sir Harry Vane_----and so sate him downe. Severall cryed
out--'What have you to say to young Sir Harry?' He rises up: _Why! if
young Sir Harry lives to be old; he will be old Sir Harry!_ and so sate
downe, and set[164] the house a laughing, as he oftentimes did.--Oliver
Cromwell once in the house called him, jestingly or scoffingly, '_Sir_
Harry Martin.' H. M. rises and bowes, 'I thanke _your majestie_, I
alwayes thought when you were _king_, that I should be knighted.'--A
godly member made a motion to have all profane and unsanctified persons
expelled the Houses. H. M. stood up and moved that all the fooles
might be putt out likewise, and then there would be a thin house.--He
was wont to sleep much in the house (at least dog-sleepe): alderman
Atkins made a motion that such scandalous members as slept and minded
not the businesse of the house, should be putt-out. H. M. starts
up--'Mr. Speaker, a motion has been to turne out the _Nodders_; I
desire the _Noddees_ may also be turnd out.'--H. M. sayd that he had
'seen the Scripture fulfilld--Thou hast exalted the humble and meeke;
thou hast filled the emptie with ... things, and the rich hast thou
sent emptie away.'--See a pretty speech of his in print about the
comeing in of the Scotts to assist and direct us.

[165]Henry Martyn made the motion in the house to call the _addressers_
to account (viz. those that addressed to Richard Cromwell, Protector,
to stand by him with their lives and fortunes), and that all the
addressers that were of it (of the house) might be turnd[166] out as
enemies to the commonwealth of England and betrayers of their trust to
bring in government by a single person. Had not Dick Cromwell sneak't
away, then it is certaine that the Rump would have cutt-off his head,
as I am well assurd from a deare friend[167] of mine.

Memorandum that Dr. <John> Wilkins (who[168] maried his[169] aunt) was
very instrumentall in perswading persons of quality and corporations to
addresse: but what did it signifie?

Henry Martin, esq.; 'you[170] have already made your little less.'

His short lettre to his cosen Stonehouse of [Radley[171]] by Abingdon
that 'if his majestie should take advice of his gunsmiths and
powder-men he would never have peace'--from Sir John Lenthall: as also
of his draweing the remonstrance of the Parliament when 'twas formed
a commonwealth--within five or six lines of the beginning he sayes
'restored to it's auncient goverment[172] of a _commonwealth_.' When
'twas read Sir Henry Vane stood up and repremanded and 'wondred at
his impudence to affirme such a notorious lye.' H. M., standing up,
meekely replied that 'there was a text had much troubled his spirit for
severall dayes and nights of the man that was blind from his mother's
womb[173] whose sight was restored[174] at last,' i.e. was restored to
the sight which he should have had.

[175]Insert the song of

             'Oliver came to the House like a spright' etc.

Obiit at Chepstowe, a prisoner, September ... (about the middle) anno
Domini 1680.

He was very hospitable and exceeding popular in Berks, the whole
countie.

Memorandum when his study was searcht they found lettres[XII.] to his
concubine, which was printed 4to. There is witt and good nature in them.

[XII.] H. Martin, esq., his letters in 4to to his miss, printed[176]
anno <1685>, but 'tis not to his disgrace: evidence of reall naturall
witt and bôn naturel.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 11.

Becket in the parish of Shrineham, his chiefe seate: in the Vale of
White-horse: now major Wildman's.




=Richard Martin= (1570-1618).


[177]Richard Martin[U] was borne....

Insert here his picture[V] which I sent to Mr. A. Wood[W].

He was of the ancient familie of the Martins of Athelminston in the
countie of Dorset, a very faire seate. The name was lost about 50
yeares since by a daughter and heire, who was maried to ... Bruen, who
had a daughter and heire maried to Sir Ralph Banks, who sold it to Sir
Robert Long (1668). In the church are severall noble monuments. Their
crest is an ape; men use to say 'a Martin ape.'

(In queen Elizabeth's time, one Penry of Wales wrote a booke[XIII.]
called _Martin Marprelate_, on which there was this epigram:--

    Martin the ape, the drunke, and the mad,
    The three Martins are whose workes we have had.
    If a fourth Martin comes after Martins so evill,
    He can be no man, he must be a devill.)

[XIII.] He was hanged for it. He was kin to my great-grandfather.

He was a very handsome man, a gracefull speaker, facetious, and
well-beloved. I thinke he dyed of a merry symposiaque.

He was recorder but a moneth before his death[178].

These verses were written on his Bible:--

    _Ad has reliquias illustrissimi amicissimique
            Richardi Martini, Recordatoris
            Londinens., qui fato concessit
                  ultº Octob. 1618._

    Tu liber aeternae complectens verba salutis,
      Pignus amicitiae moestitiaeque liber,
    Fac me Martini memorem dum vivo sepulti,
      Fac memorem mortis, fac memoremque Dei.

                                                    J. HOSKYNS.

He is buried in the north side of the Temple church, where is a faire
monument of him kneeling, with this inscription, made by his friend
serjeant Hoskyns:--

                             SALVE LECTOR.

    Martinus jacet hic; si nescis, caetera quaere.
      Interea tumuli sis memor ipse tui.

                          VALE JURISCONSULTE.

    Accedat totum precibus, quodcumque recedit
      Litibus, aeternum sic tibi tempus erit.


[179]_Richard Martin[180], recorder of London._

Ben Johnson dedicates his comoedie called the Poetaster to him:--

'A thankefull man owes a courtesie ever, the unthankefull but when he
needes. For whose innocence, as for the author's, you were once a noble
and timely undertaker to the greatest justice of this kingdome.'

Died of a symposiaque excesse with his fellow-witts[X]. Was not
recorder above a quarter of a yeare: quaere Sir <John> Hoskins.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[U] Aubrey gives in trick his coat:--'..., two bars gules;' and adds
'the crest is an ape.'

[V] This engraved portrait is now found in MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 17.
Anthony Wood has written at the top, 'Richard Martin, recorder of
London, 1618.' On the back is a note by Aubrey:--'This picture Mr. John
Hoskyns (now Sir John Hoskins, knight and baronet) gave me; grandsonne
to John Hoskyns, Martyn's friend.'

At the top of the picture is engraved 'Anno Dni 1620'; and round the
picture, 'Richardus Martinus, oraculum Londinense.' There are also the
following dedication and verses:--

'Viro illustri Lionello Cranfeildio, equiti aurato, Apothecae augustae
(Guardarobam magnam vulgus vocat) et pupillorum magistro majestatique,
Britannicae e sanctioribus consiliis, Richardum (heu fata) Martinum,
Chr. Brocus, Jo. Hoskinnius, et Hugo (heu iterum!) Hollandus, obsequii
et amoris triumviratu nexi, Amico Amicum Amici, junctis manubus
votisque sacrant.

            Princeps amorum, principum necnon amor,
            Legumque lingua, Lexque dicendi magis,
            Anglorum alumnus, praeco Virginiae ac parens,
            Generosus ortu, moribus nec degener,
            Invictus animi, corporis formâ decens,
            Oriens cadente sole sol, ortu cadens,
            Magnae urbis Os, Orbis minoris corculum,
            Bono suorum natus, extinctus suo,
            Cunctisque cognitus, nec ignotus sibi,
            Hollandi amicus, nemini hostis, ni malis,
            Virtutis (heu) Martinus hic compendium.
    Hugo Hollandus                      Simon Passaeus sculpsit.
    flevit aureumque
    aere os exprimi
    curavit.'



[W] Anthony Wood has written at the top of fol. 96 of the MS., 'see in
Trin. Coll.'; i.e. in his own _Hist. et Antiq. Univ. Oxon._ (1674),
lib. II. pag. 296. Also, on a slip attached here, Wood notes:--

'Mr. Isaac of Exeter hath told me that Richard Martin, recorder of
London, was son of Richard Martin, merchant, of Exeter: see G. 1. So
this last Richard Martin, borne in Somerset, cannot be he; and he that
was borne in Devonshire

(lib. matric. P, p. 496 <Broadgates Hall>;--Dec. 10, 1585, Rich.
Martin, Devon., generosae conditionis filius, aet. 15)

                             is too soone.'

For the reference 'G. 1.' see Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iv. 232,
233; and for 'lib. Matric. P,' see _ibid._, 136.

[X] An echo of a symposium in which this Richard Martin and other
'jolly companions' took part lingers in a copy of Macaronic verses
by John Hoskyns (see i. 416). I give them here from the copy on fol.
185ᵛ of an old common-place book in Lincoln College Library. Falconer
Madan, Esq., Fellow of Brasenose, has another old copy, with an English
version, which by his kindness I am able to add. The title of it in the
Lincoln MS. is--

'_Convivium philosophicum_: tentum in clauso Termini Sᵗⁱ. Michaëlis in
crastino[181] festi Sᵗⁱ. Egidii in campis, authore Rodolpho Calsabro,
Aeneacensi.'

But in Mr. Madan's MS. it is headed,

              'Mr. Hoskins, his Convivium Philosophicum,'

and this attribution of authorship is repeated at the end of the piece.

The _Convivium_ itself must have taken place between 1608 (Tom Coryat's
European tour) and 1612 (Henry, Prince of Wales, died November 6).

 Quilibet si sit contentus           Whosoever is contented
 Ut statutus stet conventus          That a number be convented
     Sicut nos promisimus;               Enough but not too many;
 Signum _Mitrae_ erit locus,         The _Miter_ is the place decreed,
 Erit cibus, erit jocus,             For witty jests and cleanly feed,
     Optimatatissimus.                   The betterest of any.

 Veniet, sed lente currens,          There will come, though scarcely current,
 Christoferus vocatus _Torrens_[182] Christopherus surnamèd _Torrent_[182],
     Et Johannes _Factus_[183],            And John yclepèd _Made_[183],
 _Gruicampus_[184] et Arthurus,      And Arthur _Meadow-pigmies'-foe_[184],
 Ante coenam non pransurus,          To sup, his dinner will foregoe,
     Veniet primo exactus.               Will come as soon as bade.

 Robertus _Equorum amicus_[185],     Sir Robert _Horse-lover_[185] the while
 _Ne vile aestimet_[186] Henricus    Ne let Sir Henry _count it vile_[186]
     Dignabitur adesse,                  Will come with gentle speed;
 _Cuniculus_que _quercianus_[187],   And _Rabbit-tree-where-acorn-grows_[187],
 _Caligula_[188] occurret Janus      And John surnamèd _Little-hose_[188]
     Si modo sit necesse.                Will come if there be need.

 Et Richardus _Guasta-stannum_[189]  And Richard _Pewter-waster_[189] best
 Et Henricus _Bonum-annum_[190]      And Henry _Twelve-month-good_[190]
                                             at least
     Et Johannes _Occidens_[191]         And John _Hesperian_[191] true
 Et si quis desideretur              If any be desiderated
 Protinus amercietur                 He shal bee amerciated
     Pro defaulto fourty-pence.          Forty-pence in issue.

 Hugo _Inferior-Germanus_[192],      Hugh the _Inferior-Germayne_[192],
 Nec indoctus nec profanus           Not yet unlearned nor prophane
     Ignatius _architectus_[193].        Inego _Ionicke-piller_[193].
 Sed jocus, nisi invitatus           But yet the number is not ri<gh>ted;
 Veniet illuc _Coriatus_[194],       If _Coriate_[194] bee not invited,
     Erit imperfectus.                   The jeast will want a tiller.

 Nam facete super illum,             For wittily on him, they say,
 Sicut malleus in anvillum,          As hammers on an anvil play,
     Unusquisque ludet.                  Each man his jeast may breake.
 Coriatus cum potavit,               When Coriate is fudled well,
 Lingua regnum peragrabit            His tongue begins to talke pel-mel,
     Nec illum quicquam pudet.           He shameth nought to speake.

 Puer fuit expers artis              A boy he was devoid of skill
 Et cum fabis et cum fartis          With white-pots and oaten-cakes at will
     Somersetizatus.                     Somersetizated.
 Vir cum Scotis et cum Anglis        And is a man with Scots and Angles
 Et cum scarfis et cum spanglis      With silken scarfes and with spangles
     Est accommodatus.                   Fitly accommodated.

 Si Londinum,                        Are you in love with London citty?
 Si Latinum,                         Or else with Venice? he will fitt ye;
     Amas, te amabit.                    You have his heart to prize it.
 Sive Graecum,                       Or love you Greeke--of tongues
                                             <the> chiefe,
 Ille tecum                          Or love you Latin? hee'le in briefe
     Sir Edward Ratcliffabit,            Sir Edward Ratcliffize itt.

 Hic orator aratores,                This orator of Odcombe towne
 Studens meliorare mores,            Meaning to civilize the clowne,
     Ubi congregavit,                    To parlé 'gan to call
 Rusticos et Corydones,              The rusticks and the Coridons,
 Fatuos et moriones,                 The naturalls and morions,
     Dis-coxcombiavit.                   And dis-coxcombde them all.

 Ultra littus, ultra mare,           To pass the sea, to pass the shore,
 Per Europam Fleetstreetare,         And Fleet-street is all Europe o're,
     Res periculosa.                     A thing periculous.
 Idem calceus hunc revexit,          And yet one paire of shoes, they say,
 Eadem camisia texit,                And shirt did serve him all the way,
     Res pediculosa.                     A thing pediculous.

 Quisquis hunc ecavilat,             Whoso him exouthenizth,
 Garretando squabberizat,            Garretating swaberizeth,
     Et pro hac injuria                  And for this injurie
 Disrespectus ambulabit,             He shall walk as disrespected,
 Cum bonis sociis non coenabit       Of good fellows still neglected,
     In urbe vel in curia.               In city and in curie.

 Hic in stolidum elatus,             To a fool thus elevated,
 Ut mountebankus hic effatus,        Mountebanke-like thus hee prated,
     Haranguizans bene.                  Harringuizing rowndly.
 Quisquis hic vult esse prudens,     Whosoe will be counted prudent,
 Adsit, nihil aliud studens,         Let him be no other student
     Quam potare plene.                  But to drinke profoundly.

 Quicquid agis, quicquid dicis,      Whatsoever you speak or doe
 Jocundando cum amicis,              With your friends, in jocund row,
     Eris fortunatus.                    It cannot be misdeemed.
 Hunc secundum rectum stampum,       For he that lives not ramp and scramp,
 Qui non vivit rampum scrampum       According to the swaggering stampe,
     Nemo est beatus.                    Can never be esteemed.

 Rex religionem curat,               The king religion doth out-bear,
 Populus legianciam jurat,           The people doe allegiance sweare,
     Cives foenerantur;                  Citizens usurize it.
 Miles et mercator clamant,          The soldiers and the merchants feare,
 Puer<i> et puellae amant,           The boyes and girles do love their paire,
     Foeminae moechantur.                And women cuculize it.

 Princeps nescit otiari,             Prince Henry cannot idly liven,
 Cupiens materiam dari               Desiring matter to be given
     Propriae virtuti.                   To prove his valour good.
 Carolus, imago patris,              And Charles, the image of his father,
 Imitatur acta fratris,              Doth imitate his eldest brother,
     Praelucens juventuti.               And leades the noble blood.

 Cancellarius[195] juvat multos,     The Chancellour[195] relieveth many,
 Prudentes juvat, juvat stultos,     As well the wyse as fooles, or any
     Humillime supplicantes.             In humble-wise complayninge.
 Thesaurarius[196] juvat summos;     The Treasurer[196] doth help the rich,
 Sed quoniam non habet nummos,       And cannot satisfy the stitch
     Invident mendicantes.               Of mendicants disdayninge.

 Northamptonius[197], nunquam satis  Northampton[197], seeking many wayes
 Literis et literatis                Learning and learned men to rayse,
     Juvandis, delectatur.               Is still negotiated.
 Et Suffolcius[198], severe          And Suffolke[198], seeking, in good sorte,
 Regis familiam coercere             The king his household to supporte,
     Quaerens, defatigatur.              Is still defatigated.

 Proceres aedificant,                The noblemen do edifye,
 Episcopi sanctificant,              The bishops they do sanctifie,
     Clerus concionatur;                 The cleargie preach and pray:
 Generosi terras vendunt,            And gentlemen their lands doe sell,
 Et, dum rustici contendunt,         And, while the clownes strive for
                                             the shell,
     Juridicus lucratur.                 The fish is lawyers' prey.

 Unusquisque sic facessit,           Thus every man is busy still,
 Cor nullius conquiescit,            Each one practising his skill,
     Nemo habet satis.                   None hath enough of gayne.
 Solus Coriatus sapit,               But Coriate liveth by his witts,
 Nihil perdit quicquid capit,        He looseth nothinge that he getts,
     Nec stultescit gratis.              Nor playes the fool in vayne.

 --per Johannem Hoskins[199],        --per Johannem Reinolds[200], Socium
 London.                             Coll. Novi, Oxon.




=Andrew Marvel= (1620-1678).


[201]Mr. Andrew Marvell: his father was minister of ... (I thinke,
Hull: quaere) ..., he was borne.

He had good grammar-education: and was after sent to ..., in Cambridge.

In the time of Oliver the Protector he was Latin Secretarie. He was
a great master of the Latin tongue; an excellent poet in Latin or
English: for Latin verses there was no man could come into competition
with him. The verses called _The Advice to the Painter_ were of his
making.

His native towne of Hull loved him so well that they elected him for
their representative in Parliament, and gave him an honourable pension
to maintaine him.

He was of a middling stature, pretty strong sett, roundish faced,
cherry cheek't, hazell eie, browne haire. He was in his conversation
very modest, and of very few words[202]: and though he loved wine he
would never drinke hard in company, and was[XIV.] wont to say that, _he
would not play the good-fellow in any man's company in whose hands
he would not trust his life_.

[XIV.] He was wont to say that he would not drinke high or freely with
any man with whom he would not intrust his life.

He kept bottles of wine at his lodgeing, and many times he would drinke
liberally by himselfe to refresh his spirits, and exalt his muse. I
remember I have been told (Mr. Haake and Dr. Pell) that the learned ...
(an High-German) was wont to keep bottells of good Rhenish-wine in his
studie, and when he had spent his spirits he would drinke a good rummer
of it.

James Harrington, esq. (autor _Oceanae_), was his intimate friend.
John Pell, D.D., was one of his acquaintance. He had not a generall
acquaintance.

He wrote _The Rehersall transprosed_, against Samuel Parker, D.D.; _Mr.
Smirke_, (stich't, 4to, about 8 sheets); _The naked Trueth_.

Obiit Londini, Aug. 18. 1678; and is buried in St. Giles church
in-the-fields about the middle (quaere iterum) of the south aisle. Some
suspect that he was poysoned by the Jesuites, but I cannot be positive.

I remember I heard him say that the earle of Rochester[203] was the
only man in England that had the true veine of satyre.

He[204] lies interred under the pewes in the south side of Saint Giles'
church in-the-fields, under the window wherein is painted in glasse
a red lyon, (it was given by the inneholder of the Red Lyon Inne in
Holborne) and is the ... window from the east. This account I had from
the sexton that made his grave.




=Philip Massinger= (1584?-1639/40).


[205]My brother Tom searcht the register of Wilton from the beginning
and talk't with old men. Philip Massinger was not buried there; but his
wife dyed at Cardiffe in Wales, to whom the earl of Pembroke payd an
annuity.

[206]This day I searched the register of St. Saviour's, Southwark, by
the playhouse then there, vulgo St. Mary's Overy's; and find Philip
Massinger buryed March 18th, 1639. I am enformed at the place where
he dyed, which was by the Bankes side neer the then playhouse, that
he was buryed about the middle of the Bullhead-churchyard--i.e. that
churchyard (for there are four) which is next the Bullhead taverne,
from whence it has its denomination. He dyed about the 66th yeare of
his age: went to bed well, and dyed suddenly--but not of the plague.




=Thomas May= (1595-1650).


[207]He stood candidate for[208] the laurell after B. Jonson; but Sir
William Davenant caried it--

                       manet alta mente repostum,

perhaps.

A great acquaintance of Tom Chaloner. Would, when _inter pocula_,
speake slightingly of the Trinity.

Shammed[209].

_Amicus_: Sir Richard Fanshawe. Mr. <Emanuel> Decretz heard (was
present at) the debate at their parting before Sir Richard went to the
king, where both camps were most rigorously banded[210].

Clap. Came of his death after drinking with his chin tyed with his cap
(being fatt); suffocated.

Quaere Anthony Wood pro epitaph[211], etc.

Lord Chief Justice <John> Vaughan, _amicus_--verses.


<_Scripsit._>

  _The Heire._

  Quaere Mr. <John> Dreyden, if not another <play.>
  _Lucan_, and _Supplementum_.
  _Translation of Georgiques_, 16mo.
  _Historie of Civill War_ and _Epitome_.

His translation of Lucan's excellent poeme made him in love with the
republique, which tang[212] stuck by him.

In the _Session of Poets_ by Sir John Suckling:--

                  'There was Lucan's translator too.'

[213]Thomas May, esq., a handsome man, debaucht _ad omnia_; lodged in
the little[214]by Canon-rowe, as you goe through the alley. Translated
Virgil's Georgiques. Writt:--Breviary of the historie of the Parliament
of England (London, 1650; reprinted 1680, 8vo.); History of the
victorious Edward IIId., in English verse, by Charles I's speciall
command (8vo, 1639); and also Henry İİd., in English verse, both in 8vo.

[215]As to Tom May, Mr. Edmund Wyld told me that he was acquainted
with him when he was young, and then he was as other young men of this
towne are, scil. he said he was debaucht _ad omnia_: but doe not by any
meanes take notice of it--for we have all been young. But Mr. Marvel in
his poems upon Tom May's death falls very severe upon him.

He was choaked by tyeing his cap.

That of Lucan is true, scil., that it made him incline[216] to a
republic.

He was of the Sussex Mayes, as appeares by his coate of armes: but
where borne or of what university I know not, and cannot enquire.

Dr. <Thomas> Triplet's monument is set up[217] where his stood. Thomas
May's inscription was, after it was pulled downe, in St. Bennet's
chapell, i.e. where the earl of Middlesex's monument is: but perhaps
now converted to some use.

[218]By[219] Camden:--

                       Quem Anglicana respublica
                           habuit vindicem,
                         ornamentum literaria,
                     secli sui vatum celeberrimus,
                           deliciae futuri,
                   Lucanus alter plus-quam Romanus,
                           historicus fidus,
                  equitis aurati filius primogenitus,
                             Thomas Maius
                               H. S. E.
                 Qui paternis titulis claritatis suae
                   specimen usque adeo superaddidit
                     ut a supremo Anglorum senatu
                     ad annales suos conscribendos
                            fuerit accitus.
                  Tandem, fide intemerata Parlamento
                       praestita, morte inopina
                         noctu correptus, diem
                              suum obiit
                               Id. Nov.
          Anno[220] libertatis { humanae } restitutae { MDCL.
                               { Angliae }            { II.
                           Aetatis suae LV.
                       Hoc in honorem servi tam
                              bene meriti
                     Parlamentum Reipublicae Angl.
                                 P. P.

Dr. Triplet's monument now stands in the place where this did.

This was a very fine monument of white marble. This inscription I had
much adoe to find out, after severall enquiries severall yeares. It is
putt upside downe in the chapell where the earle of Middlesex tombe is.

His coate is 'gules, a fess inter six billets or.'




=Nicholas Mercator= (1640-1686/7).


[221]Mr. Nicholas Mercator[Y]: his father was ... ... Philip Melancthon
was his great-grandmother's brother.

He is of little stature, perfect; black haire, of a delicate moyst
curle; darke[222] eie, but of great vivacity of spirit. He is of a soft
temper, of great temperance (amat Venerem aliquantum): of a prodigious
invention, and will be acquainted (familiarly) with nobody. His true
German name is Nicolas Kauffman, i.e. chapman, i.e. Mercator.

The first booke he printed was his _Cosmographia_, at ..., where
he uses his German name, 'qua sternitur fundamentum Trigonometriae
sphericorum, Logarithmicae, Astronomiae sphaericae, Geographiae,
Histiodromiae gnomonicae; a Nicola Kauffman, Holsato-Dantisc., Anno
MDCLI.'

Nicolai Mercatoris _in Geometriam introductio brevis_ quâ magnitudinum
ortus ex genuinis principiis et ortarum affectiones ex ipsa genesi
derivantur, printed at London 1678, before a little booke of Euclid's
Elements demonstrated after a new method.

_Astronomia_[Z], printed at London, 167-.

_Logarithmotechnia_; the first part printed with ... of Slusius, anno
Domini, 166-: the second part of it, being 8 sheets 4to, lyes in the
hands of Mr. Moyses Pitts and is a most admirable piece.

_Astrologia_: unprinted: in 4to, altogether after a new manner and on
other principles.

_A treatise of musique_[AA], in 4to, inch + thick[223], unprinted.

Memorandum:--Mr. Nicholas Mercator made and presented to King Charles
the 2ᵈ a clock ('twas of a foote diameter) which shewed the inequality
of the sunn's motion from the apparent motion, which the king did
understand by his informations, and did commend it, but he never had a
penny of him for it.

Well! This curious clock was neglected, and somebody of the court
happened to become master of it, who understood it not; he sold it to
Mr. Knib, a watch-maker, who did not understand it neither, who sold it
to Mr. Fromantle (that made it) for 5 _li._ who askes now (1683) for it
200 _li._

Anno 1682, mense Febr., Mr. N. Mercator left London; went with his
family to Paris, being invited thither by Monseigneur Colbert.

Nicholas Mercator, Holsatus, mathematicus, obiit Parisiis, 4to Januarii
1686/7: he went to Paris (being invited thither by Monseigneur Colbert)
the 30th of November, 1682:--from his son, David Mercator.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[Y] Aubrey gives, incompletely, a scheme of the nativity 'clarissimi
viri N. Mercatoris, Holsati'; adding that in it 'Mars is in proximity
to Mercury, but he has forgot on which side.'

[Z] On May 17, 1673, Aubrey had written to Anthony Wood (MS. Wood F.
39, fol. 208):--

'The learned (yet poore) Mr. Nicholas Mercator has a most elaborate
piece, "Astronomiae compendium sphaerice et theorice, et hypotheses
Ptolemaei, Tychonis, Copernici, Kepleri, Bullialdi, et Mercatoris."

It will be in 4to, two fingers thick; pret. 10_s._ Cambridge has
subscribed for 50; London, as many more. If he could gett, at Oxon, 50
subscriptions more the printer would print it.... There are 70 schemes.'

[AA] A copy of this treatise is found as MS. Aubr. 25. It is in two
parts:--(i) 55 pages, '_Musica_, autore N. Mercatore, Holsato, 1673,'
on which Aubrey notes, 'the original copie was lost at Paris, Jo.
Aubrey'; (ii) 19 pages, '_Musica_, autore N. Mercatore, Holsato, 1672,'
with the note, 'sum Jo. Aubrii, R.S.S.'




=Christopher Merret= (1614/5-1695).


[224]Christopher Merret, M.D., of the College of Physicians, London,
was borne in Winchcumbe in Gloucestershire, 1614, Feb. XVI about XI at
night.

[225]Scripsit against the apothecaries, etc.




=Thomas Merry= (16-- -1682).


[226]Thomas Merry[XV.], esq., was born at ... in Leicestershire. His
father or grandfather was one of the clarkes of the green-cloth.

[XV.] Thomas Mariet, esq. <is> his kinsman: vide Surrey papers[227].

He was disciple to Sir Jonas Moore; became an excellent logist. He
had donne all Euclid in a shorter and clearer manner than ever was yet
donne, and particularly the tenth booke: I have seen it. But he never
stitch't it up; and, after his death, when I came to enquire for it, it
was disparted like _Sibyllae folia_, and severall of the papers lost. I
got what I could find and brought them to the Royal Society, where they
were committed to Mr. Paget to peruse, but they were so imperfect (he
said) they were not fit to be printed. What is become of them now God
knowes.

[228]Thomas Merry, esq., a great algebrist and a great Whig, dyed at
Westminster Octob.... 1682, and lies in the vault of his grandfather at
Waltham-Stowe in Essex.




=Sir Hugh Middleton= (1555-1631).


[229]From Dr. Hugh Chamberlayn, M.D.--that King James took a moiety
of the profitts of the New River from Sir Hugh Middleton. Some say
'twas in consideration of money advanced by the king; but this is not
certain. He did indeed reconvey this back to him and his heires, etc.,
for a rent of 500 _li._ per annum, which is duly payd, but I think
graunted him from his majestie.

[230]This Sir Hugh Middleton had his picture in Gold-smyths' hall with
a waterpott by him, as if he had been the sole inventor. Mr. Fabian
Philips sawe Ingolbert[231] afterwards, in a poore rug-gowne like an
almesman, sitting by an applewoman at the Parliament stayres.

[232]Memorandum that now (1681/2) London is growne so populous and big
that the New River of Middleton can serve the pipes to private houses
but twice a weeke.--quod N. B.




=John Milton= (1608-1674).


    <This life is found in MS. Aubr. 8, foll. 63-68ᵛ. Aubrey's
    notes for it were at first very slight, but were increased by
    information afterwards obtained from Milton's widow, from
    his brother Christopher, and from his nephew Edward Phillips.
    In the life as now printed these later notes, brought in very
    disjointedly into the MS., have been set in their proper places.

    When he first began writing his 'Lives,' Aubrey set aside fol.
    103ᵛ of MS. Aubr. 6 (opposite the life of Andrew Marvell) for
    Milton, writing the heading 'Mr. John Milton' and in the margin
    drawing a wreath of laurel, for a poet. Afterwards he scored
    the heading out, and added the reference, 'vide part iiiᵈ.'
    i.e. MS. Aubr. 8. Again, in MS. Aubr. 8, he at first set aside
    fol. 93 for the life of 'Mr. John Milton,' but afterwards
    scored the heading out, and wrote there the life of Dr. John
    Overall.

    In MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63, Aubrey gives in trick the coat for
    Milton:--'argent, a double-headed eagle displayed gules legged
    and beaked sable: crest, an arme dexter holding an eagle's head
    and neck erased gules.' And, for Bradshaw, he gives the coat,
    'argent, 2 bendlets sable,' noting 'his mother was a Bradshaw.'

    On fol. 68ᵛ, in the pedigree, he gives the coats:--'Jeff<rey>,
    azure, a fret or, on a chief or a lion passant gardant sable:
    impaling [Haughton], sable, 3 bars argent': Bradshaw, as above;
    Powell of Foresthill and Webber, left blank; and Minshull,
    '..., an estoyle over a crescent ... a canton....'>


<_His parentage._>

[233]Quaere Christopher Milton, his brother, of the Inner Temple,
bencher[234].

       [235]...[XVI.] Milton[XVII.] _m._ ... Jeffrey.
                                     |
              +----------------------+-------------------+
              |                                          |
        1. John Milton _m._ Sarah                 2. ... Milton (quaere
                        |   Bradshaw.             ubi vivit. If not at
                        |                         Shotover?).
                        |
                 +------+---------------+---------------------+
                 |                      |                     |
  Mary     _m._ John  _m._ (2nd wife)   |                     |
  Powell,   |  Milton  |   Elizabeth    |                     |
  daughter  | (poeta). |   Minshull,    |                     |
  of Mr.    |          |   of Cheshire. |                     |
  Powell of |          |        2. Christopher _m._ Thomazine |
  Fosthill. |          |        Milton.         |   Webber,   |
            |          |                        |   London.   |
            |          |                        |           Anne _m._ Edward
            |          |                        |                     Philips.
            |      sans issue.          Mr. Richard Milton,
            |                           Paper buildings,
            |                           Inner Temple.
     +------+---+-------------------------+------------+
     |          |                         |            |
  A son     1. Anne _m._ ..., a       2. Mary,   3. Deborah _m._ ... Clarke,
  John[236],         |   mechanique.  unmarried.                 a ... in
  that dyed          |                                           Dublin.
  at two         sine prole.
  yeares old.

[XVI.] John, he[237] beleeves.

[XVII.] Mr. Milton lived next towne to Fosthill[238] within half a mile
like [Holton], and they[239] were raungers of the forest[240].

[241]Mr. John Milton was of an Oxfordshire familie.

His grandfather, ..., (a Roman Catholic), of Holton, in Oxfordshire,
neer Shotover[242].

His father was brought-up in the University of Oxon, at Christ Church,
and his grandfather disinherited him because he kept not to the
Catholique religion[XVIII.]. So therupon he came to London, and became
a scrivener (brought up by a friend of his; was not an apprentice),
and gott a plentifull estate by it, and left it off many yeares before
he dyed.--He was an ingeniose man; delighted in musique; composed many
songs now in print, especially that of _Oriana_[XIX.].

[XVIII.] Quaere--he found a bible in English, in his chamber.

[XIX.] Quaere Mr. J. Playford pro Wilby's sett of Oriana's.--MS. Aubr.
8, fol. 65.

[243]I have been told that the father composed a song of fourscore
parts for the Lantgrave of Hess, for which <his> highnesse sent a
meddall of gold, or a noble present. He dyed about 1647[244]; buried in
Cripplegate church, from his house in the Barbican.


<_His birth._>

[245]His son John was borne in Bread Street, in London, at[246] the
Spread Eagle, which was his house [he had also in that street another
house, the Rose; and other houses in other places].

He was borne anno Domini ... the ... day of ..., about ... a clock, in
the....

[247]☞ Quaere Mr. Christopher Milton to see the date of his brother's
birth.

[248][John Milton[249] was born the 9th of December, 1608, die
Veneris[250], half an hour after 6 in the morning.]


<_His precocity._>

[251]Anno Domini 1619, he was ten yeares old, as by his picture; and
was then a poet.


<_School, college, and travel._>

His school-master then was a Puritan, in Essex, who cutt his haire
short.

He went to schoole to old Mr.[252] Gill, at Paule's schoole. Went, at
his owne chardge[253] only, to Christ's College in Cambridge at[254]
fifteen, where he stayed eight yeares at least[255]. Then he travelled
into France and Italie (<he> had Sir H. Wotton's commendatory letters).
At Geneva he contracted a great friendship with[256] the learned Dr.
Deodati of Geneva:--vide his poems. He was acquainted[257] with Sir
Henry Wotton, ambassador at Venice, who delighted in his company. He
was severall[XX.] yeares beyond sea, and returned[258] to England just
upon the breaking-out of the civill warres.

[XX.] Quaere, how many? Resp., two yeares.

[259]From his brother, Christopher Milton:--when he went to schoole,
when he was very young, he studied very hard, and sate-up very late,
commonly till 12 or one a clock at night, and his father ordered the
mayde to sitt-up for him, and in those yeares (10) composed many copies
of verses which might well become a riper age. And was a very hard
student in the University, and performed all his exercises there with
very good applause. His first tutor there was Mr. Chapell; from whom
receiving some unkindnesse[XXI.], he was afterwards (though it seemed
contrary to the rules of the college) transferred to the tuition of
one Mr. Tovell, who dyed parson of Lutterworth.

[XXI.] Whip't him.

[260]He went to travell about the year 1638 and was abroad about a
year's space, cheifly in Italy.


<_Return to England._>

Immediately after his return he tooke a lodging at Mr. Russell's, a
taylour, in St. Bride's churchyard, and took into his tuition his
sister's two sons, Edward and John Philips, the first 10, the other 9
years of age; and in a year's time made them capable of interpreting a
Latin authour at sight, etc. And within three years they went through
the best of Latin and Greec poetts[261]--Lucretius and Manilius[XXII.],
of the Latins; Hesiod, Aratus, Dionysius Afer, Oppian, Apollonii
_Argonautica_, and Quintus Calaber. Cato, Varro, and Columella _De re
rustica_ were the very first authors they learn't.--As he was severe on
one hand, so he was most familiar and free in his conversation to those
to whome most sowre in his way of education. N.B. he made his nephews
songsters, and sing, from the time they were with him.

[XXII.] and with him the use of the globes, and some rudiments of
arithmetic and geometry.


<_First wife and children._>

[262]He maried his first wife[XXIII.] <Mary> Powell, of Fosthill, at
Shotover, in Oxonshire, anno Domini ...; by whom he had 4 children.
<He> hath two daughters living: Deborah was his amanuensis (he taught
her Latin, and to read Greeke[263] to him when he had lost his
eie-sight, which was anno Domini ...).

[XXIII.] She was a zealous royalist, and went without her husband's
consent to her mother in the king's quarters. She dyed anno Domini....


<_Separation from his first wife._>

[She[264] went from him to her mother's at ... in the king's quarters,
neer Oxford], anno Domini ...; and wrote the _Triplechord_ about
divorce.

[265]Two opinions[266] doe not well on the same boulster. She was
a ...[267] royalist, and went to her mother to the king's quarters,
neer Oxford. I have perhaps so much charity to her that she might not
wrong his bed: but what man, especially contemplative, would like to
have a young wife environ'd and storm'd by the sons of Mars, and those
of the enemi partie?

[268]His first wife (Mrs. Powell, a royalist) was brought up and
lived where there was a great deale of company and merriment[269].
And when she came to live with her husband, at Mr. Russell's, in St.
Bride's churchyard, she found it very solitary; no company came to her;
oftentimes heard his nephews beaten and cry. This life was irkesome
to her, and so she went to her parents at Fost-hill. He sent for her,
after some time; and I thinke his servant was evilly entreated: but as
for matter of wronging his bed, I never heard the least suspicions; nor
had he, of that, any jealousie.


<_Second wife._>

[270]He had a middle wife, whose name was (he[271] thinkes, Katharin)
Woodcock. No child living by her.


<_Third wife._>

[272]He maried his second[273] wife, Elizabeth Minshull, anno ... (the
year before the sicknesse): a gent. person, a peacefull and agreable
humour.


<_His public employment._>

He was Latin secretary to the Parliament[274].


<_His blindness._>

[275]His sight began to faile him at first upon his writing against
Salmasius, and before 'twas fully compleated one eie absolutely faild.
Upon the writing of other bookes, after that, his other eie decayed.

[276]His eie-sight was decaying about 20 yeares before his death:
quaere, when starke[277] blind? His father read without spectacles at
84. His mother had very weake eies, and used spectacles presently after
she was thirty yeares old.


<_Writings after his blindness._>

[278]After he was blind he wrote these following bookes, viz.
_Paradise Lost_, _Paradise Regained_, _Grammar_, _Dictionarie_
(imperfect)--quaere +.

[279]I heard that after he was blind that he was writing a Latin
Dictionary (in the hands of Moyses Pitt[280]). Vidua affirmat she gave
all his papers (among which this dictionary, imperfect) to his nephew,
a sister's son, that he brought up, ... Philips, who lives neer the
Maypole in the Strand (quaere). She has a great many letters by her
from learned men, his acquaintance, both of England and beyond sea.


<_His later residences._>

He lived in several places, e.g. Holborne neer King's-gate. He died in
Bunhill, opposite to the Artillery-garden wall.


<_His death and burial._>

He died of the gowt[281] struck in, the 9th or 10th of November, 1674,
as appeares by his apothecarye's booke.

He lies buried in St. Giles's Cripplegate, upper end of chancell at
the right hand, vide his gravestone[282].--Memorandum his stone is
now removed; for, about two yeares since (now, 1681), the two steppes
to the communion table were raysed. I ghesse John Speed and he lie
together.


<_Personal characteristics._>

His harmonicall and ingeniose soul did lodge[283] in a beautifull and
well-proportioned body:--

                  In toto nusquam corpore menda fuit.

                                           Ovid. <1 _Amor._ 5, 18.>

[284]He was a spare man. He was scarce so tall as I am--quaere, quot
feet I am high: resp., of middle stature.

He had abroun[285] hayre. His complexion exceeding[286] faire--he was
so faire that they called him _the lady of Christ's College_. Ovall
face. His eie a darke gray.

[287]He had a delicate tuneable voice, and had good[288] skill. His
father instructed him. He had an organ in his howse: he played on that
most.

[289]Of a very cheerfull humour.--He would be chear-full even in his
gowte-fitts, and sing.

He was very healthy and free from all diseases: seldome tooke any
physique (only sometimes he tooke manna): only towards his latter end
he was visited with the gowte, spring and fall.

He had a very good[290] memorie; but I beleeve that his excellent
method of thinking and disposing did much to helpe his memorie.

[291]He pronounced the letter R (littera canina) very hard--[292]a
certaine signe of a satyricall witt--from John Dreyden.


<_Portraits of him._>

[293]Write his name in red letters on his pictures, with his widowe, to
preserve.

[294]His widowe haz his picture, drawne very well and like, when a
Cambridge schollar.

She has his picture when a Cambridge schollar, which ought to be
engraven; for the pictures before his bookes are not _at all_ like him.


<_His habits._>

[295]His exercise was chiefly walking.

He was an early riser (scil. at 4 a clock manè); yea, after he lost
his sight. He had a man read to him. The first thing he read was
the Hebrew Bible, and that was[296] at 4 h. manè 1/2 h. +. Then he
contemplated[297].

At 7 his man came to him again, and then read to him again, and wrote
till dinner: the writing was as much as the reading. His (2) daughter,
Deborah, could read to him Latin, Italian and French, and Greeke. <She>
maried in Dublin to one Mr. Clarke (sells[298] silke, etc.); very like
her father. The other sister is (1) Mary, more like her mother.

After dinner he used to walke 3 or four houres at a time (he alwayes
had a garden where he lived); went to bed about 9.

Temperate man, rarely dranke between meales.

Extreme pleasant in his conversation, and[299] at dinner, supper, etc.;
but satyricall.


<_Notes about some of his works._>

[300]From[301] Mr. E. Philips:--All the time of writing his _Paradise
Lost_, his veine began at the autumnall aequinoctiall, and ceased at
the vernall (or thereabouts: I believe about May): and this was 4 or
5 yeares of his doeing it. He began about 2 yeares before the king
came-in, and finished about three yeares after the king's restauracion.

In the 4th[302] booke of _Paradise Lost_ there are about six verses of
Satan's exclamation to the sun, which Mr. E. Philips remembers about
15 or 16 yeares before ever his poem was thought of. Which verses were
intended for the beginning of a tragoedie which he had designed, but
was diverted from it by other businesse.

[303][Whatever[304] he wrote against monarchie was out of no animosity
to the king's person, or owt of any faction or interest, but out of
a pure zeale to the liberty of mankind, which he thought would be
greater under a fre state than under a monarchiall goverment. His
being so conversant in Livy and the Roman authors, and the greatness
he saw donne by the Roman common-wealth, and the vertue of their great
commanders[305] induc't him to.]

[306]From Mr. Abraham Hill:--Memorandum: his sharp writing against
Alexander More, of Holland, upon a mistake, notwithstanding he had
given him by the ambassador[XXIV.] all satisfaction to the contrary:
viz. that the booke called 'Clamor[307]' was writt by Peter du Moulin.
Well, that was all one; he having writt it, it should goe into the
world; one of them was as bad as the other.

[XXIV.] Quaere the ambassador's name of Mr. Hill? Resp., Newport, the
Dutch ambassador.

[308]Memorandum:--Mr. Theodore Haak, Regiae Societatis Socius,
hath translated halfe his Paradise Lost into High Dutch in such
blank verse, which is very well liked of by Germanus Fabricius,
Professor at Heidelberg, who sent to Mr. Haak a letter upon this
translation:--'incredibile est quantum nos omnes affecerit gravitas
styli, et copia lectissimorum verborum,' etc.--vide the letter.

[309]Mr. John Milton made two admirable panegyricks, as to sublimitie
of witt, one on Oliver Cromwel, and the other on Thomas, lord Fairfax,
both which his nephew Mr. Philip hath. But he hath hung back these two
yeares, as to imparting copies to me for the collection of mine with
you[310]. Wherfore I desire you in your next to intimate your desire
of having these two copies of verses aforesayd. Were they made in
commendation of the devill, 'twere all one to me: 'tis the ὕψος that I
looke after. I have been told 'tis beyond Waller's or anything in that
kind.


<_Catalogue of his writings._>

[311]Quaere his nephew, Mr. Edward Philips, for a perfect catalogue of
his writings. Memorandum, he wrote a little tract of education.

  [312]1. Of Reformation.           } Qu. whether two
     Against prelatical Episcopacy. } books?
  2. The reason of Church Goverment.
  3. A defence of Smectymnuus.
  4. The Doctrin and Disciplin of Divorce. }
  5. Colasterion.                          } All these in prosecution
  6. The Judgement of Martin Bucer.        } of the same subject.
  7. Tetrachordon (of divorce).            }
  Areopagitica, viz. for the libertie of the presse.
  Of Education.
  Iconoclastes.
  Tenure of Kings and Magistrates.
  Defensio populi Anglicani.
  Defensio 2ᵈᵃ contra Morum.
  Defensio 3ᵗⁱᵃ.
  His Logick.
  Of the powr of the civil magistrate in ecclesiastical affairs.
  Against Hirelings (against Tythes).
  Of a Commonwealth.
  Against Dr. Griffith.
  Of Toleration, Heresie, and Schisme.


[313]_Catalogus Librorum[XXV.]._

[XXV.] Set them downe according to order of time.

1. Poëms, 8vo, printed.... Twice printed. Some writt but at 18.

Of Reformation.

2. Εἰκονοκλάστης, printed at....

3. pro populo Anglicano defensio, contra Salmasium.

4. Tetrachordon, 4to: of divorce.

  5. Paradise { Lost, 4to.     } Edward Philips his cheif
  6.          { Regained, 4to. } amanuensis.

  7. Latine epistles, 8vo. { Familiar.
                           { Politique.

8. Latin grammar in English, 8vo.

9. The history of Britain from the first tradicionall beginning
continued to the Norman Conquest, 4to, London, MDCLXX, for James
Alesly, Rose and Crowne, Paul's Churchyard. Scripsit prout per effigiem
[sed falsam] 1670, aetat. 62.

10. A letter of education to Mr. S. Hartlib (with his poëms).

11. A brief history of Muscovia and other less knowne countries lyeing
eastward. Advertisement:--'writt by the author's owne hand before he
lost his sight and intended to have printed it before his death.'

12. His logick.

13. _Idea Theologiae_ in MS. in the handes of Mr. Skinner, a merchant's
sonne, in Marke-lane. Memorandum there was one Mr. Skinner of the
Jerkers office up 2 paire of stayres at the Custome-house.

14. He wrote a dictionary called _Idioma linguae Latinae_ (from Mr.
Packer who was his scholar).


<_An almost contemporary life of Milton._>

[314]Quaere Mr. <Andrew> Allam, of Edmund-hall, Oxon, of John Milton's
life writt by himselfe[315]: vide pagg....


<_His acquaintance._>

[316]He was visited much by learned <men>; more then he did desire.

He was mightily importuned to goe into France and Italie. Foraigners
came much to see him, and much admired him, and offer'd to him great
preferments to come over to them: and the only inducement of severall
foreigners that came over into England, was chiefly to see Oliver
Protector, and Mr. John Milton; and would see the house and chamber
wher _he_ was borne. He was much more admired abrode then at home.

His familiar learned acquaintance were Mr. Andrew Marvell, Mr. Skinner,
Dr. Pagett, M.D.

Mr. <Cyriack> Skinner, who was his disciple.

John Dreyden, esq., Poet Laureate, who very much admires him, and went
to him to have leave to putt his Paradise Lost into a drama in rhymne.
Mr. Milton recieved him civilly, and told him he would give him leave
to tagge his verses.

His widowe assures me that Mr. T. Hobbs was not one of his
acquaintance, that her husband did not like him at all, but he would
acknowledge[317] him to be a man of great parts, and a learned man.
Their interests and tenets did[318] run counter to each other; vide in
Hobbes' _Behemoth_.




=George Monk= (1608-1670).


[319]G. M[320]. was borne at ... in Devon (vide Devon in Heralds'
Office), a second son of ..., an ancient familie, and which had about
Henry 8's time 10,000 _li._ per annum (as he himselfe sayd).

He was a strong, lusty, well-sett young fellow; and in his youth
happened to slay a man[XXVI.], which was the occasion of his flying
into the Low-countries, where he learned to be a soldier.

[XXVI.] From Mʳⁱˢ Linden, his kinswoman, a Devon woman whose name was
Monke.

At the beginning of the late civill warres, he came over to the king's
side, where he had command (quaere in what part of England).

Anno ... he was prisoner in the Tower, where his semstres, Nan
Cl<arges> (a blacksmith's[XXVII.] daughter), was kind to him;
in a double capacity. It must be remembred that he then was in
want[XXVIII.], and she assisted him. Here she was gott with child. She
was not at all handsome, nor cleanly. Her mother was one of the five
woemen barbers.

[XXVII.] The shop is still of that trade; the corner-shop, the
first turning on the right hand as you come out of the Strand into
Drury-lane; the howse is now built of brick.

[XXVIII.] He was taken prisoner by the Parliament forces, and kept in
the Tower; and the trueth was, he was forgotten and neglected at Court,
that they did not thinke of exchanging him, and he was in want.

Anno ... (as I remember, 1635) there was a maried woman in Drury-lane
that had clapt (i.e. given the pox to) a woman's husband, a neighbor
of hers. She complained of this to her neighbour gossips. So they
concluded on this revenge, viz. to gett her and whippe her and ...;
which severities were executed and put into a ballad. 'Twas the first
ballad I ever cared for the reading of: the burden of it was thus:--

    Did yee ever heare the like
      Or ever heard the same
    Of five woemen-barbers
      That lived in Drewry lane?

Vide the Ballad-booke[321].

Anno ... her brother, T<homas> Cl<arges>, came a ship-board to G. M.
and told him his sister was brought to bed. 'Of what?' sayd he. 'Of a
son.' 'Why then,' sayd he, 'she is my wife.' He had only this child.

Anno.., (I have forgott by what meanes) he gott his libertie, and an
employment under Oliver (I thinke) at sea, against the Dutch, where he
did good service; he had courage enough. But I remember the sea-men
would laugh, that in stead of crying _Tack about_, he would say _Wheele
to the right_ (or _left_).

Anno 16.. he had command in Scotland (vide his life), where he was well
beloved by his soldiers, and, I thinke, that country (for an enemie).
Oliver, Protector, had a great mind to have him home, and sent him a
fine complementall letter, that he desired <him> to come into England
to advise with him. He sent his highnesse word, that if he pleased
he would come and waite upon him at the head of 10,000 men. So that
designe was spoyled.

Anno 1659/60, Febr. 10th (as I remember), being then sent for by the
Parliament to disband Lambert's armie, he came into London with his
army about one a clock P.M.[XXIX.] He then sent to the Parliament this
letter, which[322], printed, I annex here. Shortly after he was sent
for to the Parliament house; where, in the howse, a chaire was sett for
him, but he would not (in modestie) sitt downe in it. The Parliament
(Rumpe[XXX.]) made him odious to the citie, purposely, by pulling down
and burning their gates (which I myselfe sawe). The Rumpe invited him
to a great dinner, Febr. ... (shortly after); from whence it was never
intended that he should have returned (of this I am assured by one of
that Parliament). The members stayd till 1, 2, 3, 4 a clock, but at
last his excellency sent them word he could not come: I beleeve he
suspected some treacherie.

[XXIX.] on a Saterday. On Sunday (the next day) Sir Ralph Sydenham (his
countreyman) went and dined with him, and after dinner told him that
God had putt a good opportunity into his handes, innuend. restoring
the king; to which he gave an indefinite answer, and sayd he hoped he
should doe like an honest man. We that were Sir Ralph's acquaintance
were longing for his coming home to supper for the generall's answer,
who kept him till 9 at night. He, after the king's restauration, made
him Master of Charter-howse.

[XXX.] _the Rumpe of a Howse_: 'twas the wooden invention of generall
Browne (a woodmonger).

You must now know that long before these dayes, colonel <Edward>
Massey, and Thomas Mariett, of Whitchurch in Warwickshire, esqre, held
correspondence with his majestie, who wrote them letters with his owne
hand, which I have seen. Both these were now in London privately. Tom
Mariett laye with me (I was then of the Middle Temple); G. M. lay at
Draper's hall[323] in Throckmorton-street. Col. Massey (Sir Edward
afterwards), and T. Mariett every day were tampering with G. M., as
also col. <John> Robinson (afterward Liewtenant of the Tower: whom I
remember they counted not so wise as King Salomon); and they could not
find any inclination or propensity in G. M. for their purpose, scil.
to be instrumentall to bring in the king. Every night late, I had an
account of all these transactions abed, which like a sott as I was, I
did not, while fresh in memorie, committ to writing, as neither has T.
M.[XXXI.]: but I remember in the maine, that they were satisfied he no
more intended or designed the king's restauration, when he came into
England, or first came to London, then his horse did. But shortly after
finding himselfe at a losse; and that he was (purposely) made odious to
the citie, as aforesayd--and that he was a lost man--by the Parliament;
and that the generality of the citie and country were for the restoring
the king, having long groaned under the tyranny of other governments;
he had no way to save himselfe but to close with the citie, etc.,
again. Memorandum that Thredneedle-street was all day long, and late
at night, crammed with multitudes, crying out _A free Parliament, a
free Parliament_, that the aire rang with their clamours[324]. One
evening, viz. Feb.... (quaere diem) he comeing out on horseback[325],
they were so violent that he was almost afrayd of himselfe, and so, to
satisfie them (as they use to doe to importunate children), _Pray be
quiet, yee shall have a free Parliament_. This about 7, or rather 8
as I remember at night. Immediately a loud holla and shout was given,
all the bells in <the> city ringing, and the whole citie looked as if
it had been in a flame by the bonfires, which were prodigiously great
and frequent and ran like a traine over the citie, and I sawe some
balcone's that began to be kindled. They made little gibbetts, and
roasted[326] rumpes of mutton; nay, I sawe some very good rumpes of
beefe[327]. Healths to the king, Charles II, were dranke in the streets
by the bonfires, even on their knees; and this humor ran by the next
night to Salisbury, where was the like joy; so to Chalke, where they
made a great bonfire on the top of the hill; from hence to Blandford
and Shaftesbury, and so to the Land's-end: and perhaps it was so over
all England. So that the return of his most gracious majestie was by
the hand of GOD[XXXII.]; but as by this person meerly accidentall,
whatever the pompous History in 8vo. sayes (printed at ... opposite
to St. Dunstan's church: quaere if not writt by Sir Thomas Clargies,
brother to her Grace, formerly an apothecary; and was physician to his
army, and 1660 was created M. Dr., who commonly at Coffee-houses uses
to pretend strange things, of his contrivances, and bringing-on of his
brother-in-lawe to ...).

[XXXI.] Quaere T. M. iterum de his.

[XXXII.] A Domino factum est istud: et est mirabile in oculis nostris.
Hoc[328] est dies quam fecit dominus, exultemus et laetemur in
ea.--Psm. cxviii. 23, 24.

Well! A free Parliament was chosen, and mett the ... of.... Sir
Harbottle Grimston, knight and baronet, was chosen Speaker. The first
thing he putt to the question was, 'Whether CHARLES STEWARD should
be sent for, or no?' 'Yea, yea,' _nemine contradicente_. Sir John
Greenvill (now earle of Bathe) was then in towne, and posted away to
Bruxells; found the king at dinner, little dreaming of so good newes,
rises presently from dinner, had his coach immediately made readie, and
that night gott out of the king of Spaine's dominions into the prince
of Orange's country, I thinke, Breda[XXXIII.].

[XXXIII.] This I have heard bishop John Earles and his wife Bridget,
then at Bruxells, say, severall times.

Now, as the morne growes lighter and lighter, and more glorious, till
it is perfect day, so[329]it was with the joy of the people. Maypoles,
which in the hypocriticall times, 'twas ... to sett-up, now were sett
up in every crosse-way: and at the Strand, neer Drury-lane, was sett-up
the most prodigious one for height, that (perhaps) was ever seen;
they were faine (I remember) to have the assistance of the sea-men's
art to elevate it; that which remaines (being broken with a high wind
anno ..., I thinke about 1672) is but two parts of three of the whole
height from the grownd, besides what is in the earth. The juvenile and
rustique folkes at that time had so much their fullnesse of desires in
this kind, that I thinke there have been very few sett-up since. The
honours conferred on G. M. every one knowes.

His sence might be good enough, but he was slow, and heavie. He dyed
anno ... and had a magnificent funerall, suitable to his greatnesse.
His figure in his robes was very artificially donne, which lay in a
catafalco under a canopie, in or neer the east end of Westminster
abby, a moneth or 6 weekes. Seth Ward, lord bishop of Sarum (his great
acquaintance), preached his funerall sermon, which is printed for....
His eldest brother dyed sine prole, about the time of the King's
returne. His other brother, <Nicholas Monk[330]> was made bishop of
Hereford. G. M. and his duchess dyed within a day or two of each other.
The bishop of Sarum told me that he did the last office of a confessor
to his grace; and closed his eies, as his lordship told me himselfe.

Some moneths before G. M.'s comeing into England, the king sent Sir
Richard Grenvill (since earl of Bath) to him to negotiate with him that
he would doe him service, and to correspond with him. Said he, 'If
opportunity be, I will doe him service; but I will not by any meanes
have any correspondence[331] with him'; and he did like a wise man in
it; for if he had he would certainly have been betrayed.

'Twas shrewd advice which <William> Wyld, then Recorder of London,
gave to the citizens, i.e. to keep their purse-strings fast; els, the
Parliament would have payed the army and kept out the king.

He was first an ensigne, and after a captain, in the Lowe-countreys,
and for making false musters was like to have been ... which he
afterward did not forget:--from major Cosh.

This underneath was writt on the dore of the House of Commons.

    Till it be understood
    What is under Monke's hood,
      The citizens putt in their hornes.
    Untill the ten dayes are out,
    The Speaker[XXXIV.] haz the gowt,
      And the Rump, they sitt upon thornes.

[XXXIV.] Lenthall.

Memorandum:--Mr. Baron Brampton hath invited me to his chamber to
give me a farther account of generall Monk.--I[332] let slip the
opportunity, and my honoured friend is dead.




=Sir Jonas Moore= (1617-1679).


[333]Sir Jonas More: vide[334] Φ, p. 128. Sciatica he cured it, by
boyling his buttock. The D.[335] Y. said that 'Mathematicians and
physicians had no religion': which being told to Sir Jonas More, he
presented his duty to the D. Y.[336] and wished 'with all his heart
that his highnesse _were a mathematician too_': this was since he was
supposed to be a Roman Catholic.

[337]He was a clarke under Dr. Burghill, Chancellor of Durham. Parson
Milbourne, in the Bishoprick, putt him upon the Mathematiques, and
instructed him in it. Then he came to the Middle Temple, London, where
he published his Arithmetique, and taught it in Stanhop-street. After
this, gott-in with the lord Gorges, earle of Bedford, and Sir Thomas
Chichiley, for the surveying of the fennes:--from captain Sherbourne.

Mr. ... Gascoigne (of the North, I thinke Yorkeshire), a person of good
estate, a most learned gentleman, who was killed in the civill warres
in the king's cause, a great mathematician, and bred by the Jesuites
at Rome, gave him good information in mathematicall knowledge. Pray
inquire of our friend, Mr. Ralph Sheldon, for as many memorialls of
him[AB] as you can: he was one of the most accomplisht gentlemen of his
time.

[338]Sir Jonas Moore[AC] was borne at Whitelee in Lancashire, towards
the bishoprick of Durham. He was inclined to mathematiques when a boy,
which some kind friends[339] of his (whom he mentions in the preface of
his first edition of his Arithmetique, dedicated to ... about 1647, and
Edmund Wyld, esq.), and afterwards Mr. Oughtred, more fully enformed
him; and then he taught gentlemen in London, which was his livelyhood.

When the great levell of the fennes was to be surveyed, Mr. Wyld
aforesaid who was his scholar and a member of Parliament was very
instrumentall in helping him to the employment of surveying it, which
was his rise, which I have heard him acknowledge with much gratitude
before severall persons of quality, since he was a knight, and which
evidenced an excellent good nature in him.

☞ Memorandum:--when he surveyed the fennes, he observed the line that
the sea made on the beach, which is not a streight line (quaere what
line?), by which meanes he gott great credit in keeping-out the sea in
Norfolke; so[340] he made his bankes against the sea of the same line
that the sea makes on the beach; and no other could doe it, but that
the sea would still breake-in upon it.

Memorandum:--he made a modell of <a> citadell for Oliver Cromwell, to
bridle the city of London, which Mr. Wyld has; and this citadell was to
have been the crosse building of St. Paule's church.

Upon the restauration of his majestie he was made Master Surveyor of
his majestie's ordinance and armories.

A.D. 167- he received the honour of knighthood. He was a good
mathematician, and a good fellowe.

He dyed at Godalmyng, comeing from Portsmouth to London ..., and was
buried Septemb. 2ᵈ 1679, at the Tower Chapell, with sixtie peices of
ordinance (equal to the number of his yeares). He was tall and very
fat, thin skin, faire, cleare grey eie.

He alwayes intended to have left his library of mathematicall bookes to
the Royall Societie, of which he was a member; but he happened to dye
without making a will, wherby the Royal Societie have a great losse.

His only sonne, Jonas, had the honour of knighthood conferred upon
him, August 9, 1680, at Windsor; 'his majestie being pleased to give
him this marke of his favour as well in consideration of his owne
abilities, as of the faithfull service of his father deceased' (_London
Gazette_, no. 1537)--but young Sir Jonas, when he is old, will never be
_old Sir Jonas_, for all the Gazette's elogie.

Memorandum:--speake to Sir Christopher Wren to gett the wooden sphaere
that was made for Prince Henry by Mr. <Edward> Wright, out of young Sir
Jonas Moore's handes, into the king's again.

I remember Sir Jonas told us that a Jesuite (I think 'twas
Grenbergerus, of the Roman College) found out a way of flying, and that
he made a youth[341] performe it. Mr. Gascoigne taught an Irish boy
the way, and he flew over a river in Lancashire (or therabout), but
when he was up in the ayre, the people gave a shoute, wherat the boy
being frighted, he fell downe on the other side of the river, and broke
his legges, and when he came to himselfe, he sayd that he thought the
people had seen some strange apparition, which fancy amazed him. This
was anno 1635, and he spake it in the Royall Societie, upon the account
of the flyeing at Paris, two yeares since. Vide the Transactions.

I remember I have heard Sir Jonas say that when he began
mathematiques, he wonderfully profited by reading Billingesley's
Euclid, and that 'twas his excellent, cleare, and plaine exposition of
the 4ᵗʰ proposition of the first booke of the Elements, did first open
and cleare his understanding: quod N.B.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[AB] i.e. William Gascoigne: vol. i. p. 260. Ralph Sheldon of Beoly was
a Catholic; and at his house Anthony Wood received much information
about Catholic writers: Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iii. 98.

[AC] Aubrey gives in trick the coat: 'azure, a swan within a bordure
engrailed argent.'




=Sir Robert Moray= (16---1673).


[342]Sir Robert Moray, knight:--he was of the ancient family of the
Morays in Scotland. He was borne ... (as I take it, in the Highlands),
anno domini.... The Highlanders (like the Swedes) can make their owne
cloathes; and I have heard Sir Robert say that he could doe it.

He spent most of his time in France. After his juvenile education at
schoole and the University he betooke himselfe to military employment
in the service of Lewis the 13th. He was at last Lieuetenant-Colonel
to.... He was a great master of the Latin tongue and was very well
read. They say he was an excellent soldier.

He was far from the rough humour of the camp breeding, for he was a
person the most obliging about the court and the only man that would
doe a kindnesse _gratis_ upon an account of friendship. A lacquey could
not have been more obsequious and diligent. What I doe now averre I
know to be true upon my owne score as well as others. He was a most
humble and good man, and as free from covetousness as a Carthusian. He
was abstemious and abhorred woemen. His majesty was wont to teaze at
him. 'Twas pitty he was a Presbyterian.

He was the chiefe appuy of his countreymen and their good angel. There
had been formerly a great friendship between him and the duke of
Lauderdale, till, about a yeare or two before his death, he went to the
duke on his returne from Scotland and told him plainly that he had
betrayed his countrey.

He was one of the first contrivers and institutors of the Royall
Societie and was our first president, and performed his charge in the
chaire very well.

He was my most honoured and obligeing friend, and I was more obliged
to him then to all the courtiers besides. I had a great losse in his
death, for, had he lived, he would have got some employment or other
for me before this time. He had the king's eare as much as any one, and
was indefatigable in his undertakings. I was often with him. I was with
him three houres the morning he dyed; he seemed to be well enough[343].
I remember he dranke at least 1/2 pint of faire water, according to his
usuall custome.

His lodgeing where he dyed was the leaded pavillion in the garden at
Whitehall. He dyed suddenly July 4ᵗʰ about 8 hours P.M. Aº.D. 1673. Had
but one shilling in his pocket, i.e. _in all_. The king buryed him. He
lyes by Sir William Davenant in Westminster abbey.

He was a good chymist and assisted his majestie in his chymicall
operations.




=Sir Thomas More= (1480-1535).


[344]Sir Thomas More[AD], Lord Chancellour:--his countrey-howse was
at Chelsey, in Middlesex, where Sir John Danvers built his house. The
chimney-piece of marble in Sir John's chamber, was the chimney-piece
of Sir Thomas More's chamber, as Sir John himselfe told me. Where the
gate is now, adorned with two noble pyramids, there stood anciently
a gate-house, which was flatt on the top, leaded, from whence is a
most pleasant prospect of the Thames and the fields beyond. On this
place the Lord Chancellour More was wont to recreate himselfe and
contemplate. It happened one time that a Tom of Bedlam came-up to him,
and had a mind to have throwne him from the battlements, saying 'Leap,
Tom, leap.' The Chancellour was in his gowne, and besides ancient, and
not able to struggle with such a strong fellowe. My lord had a little
dog with <him>; sayd he 'Let us first throwe the dog downe, and see
what sport that will be'; so the dog was throwne over. 'This is very
fine sport,' sayd my lord, 'let us fetch him up, and try once more.'
While the madman was goeing downe, my lord fastned the dore, and called
for help, but ever after kept the dore shutt.

Memorandum that in his Utopia his lawe[345] is[XXXV.] that the young
people are to see each other stark-naked before marriage. Sir <William>
Roper, of ... in[346] Eltham in Kent, came one morning, pretty early,
to my lord, with a proposall to marry one of <his> daughters. My lord's
daughters were then both together a bed in a truckle-bed in their
father's chamber asleep. He carries Sir <William> into the chamber and
takes the sheet by the corner and suddenly whippes it off....[347]
Here was all the trouble of the wooeing.--This account I had from
my honoured friend old Mris. Tyndale, whose grandfather Sir William
Stafford was an intimate acquaintance of this Sir ... Roper, who told
him the story.

[XXXV.] Vide _Utopia_, pp. 195, 196, de proco et puella, concerning
marriage--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 42.

This Sir <William> Roper (from whom[348] is descended the lord Tenham)
had in one piece, drawne by Hans Holbeine, the pictures of Sir Thomas
More, his lady, and all his children, which hung at his house aforesaid
in Kent: but about 1675 'twas presented as a raritie to King Charles II
and hangs in Whitehall.

His discourse was extraordinary facetious. Riding one night, upon the
suddaine, he crossed himself _majori cruce_, crying out[XXXVI.] 'Jesu
Maria! doe not you see that prodigious dragon in the sky?' They all
lookt-up, and one did not see it, nor the tother did not see it. At
length one had spyed it, and at last all had spied. Wheras there was no
such phantôme; only he imposed on their phantasies.

[XXXVI.] Vide Erasmi Colloquia--'Spectrum.'

After he was beheaded, his trunke was interred in Chelsey church, neer
the middle of the south wall, where was some slight monument[XXXVII.]
erected, which being worne by time, about 1644 Sir ... Laurence, of
Chelsey (no kinne to him), at his own proper cost and chardges, erected
to his memorie a handsome faire inscription of marble.

[XXXVII.] Sir Thomas More's inscription is in the south side of the
chancell <in Chelsea church>--Sir John Laurence of Chelsey repaired
Sir Thomas More's inscription (quaere lady Purbec when).--Sir John
Laurence, baronet, obiit 1638.--MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 16.

His head was upon London bridge: there goes this story in the family,
viz. that one day as one of his daughters was passing under the bridge,
looking on her father's head[349], sayd she, 'That head haz layn[350]
many a time in my lapp, would to God it would fall into my lap as I
passe under.' She had her wish, and it did fall into her lappe, and is
now preserved in a vault in the cathedrall church at Canterbury. The
descendant of Sir Thomas, is Mr. More, of Chilston, in Herefordshire,
where, among a great many things of value plundered[351] by the
soldiers, was his chap, which they kept for a relique. Methinks 'tis
strange that all this time he is not canonized, for he merited highly
of the church.

Memorandum:--in the hall of Sir John Lenthall, at Bessils-Lye in
Berks, is an original of Sir Thomas and his father, mother, wife, and
children, donne by Hans Holbein. There is an inscription in golden
letters of about 60 lines, which I spake to Mr. Thomas Pigot, of Wadham
College, to transcribe, and he has donne it very carefully. Aske him
for it. Vide Mr. Thomas Pigot, in part[352] iii.

Memorandum:--about the later end of Erasmus's _Epistolae_, Antverp
edition, pag. 503, 504, 505, is an epitaph for Sir Thomas More, and
another for his lady.

Memorandum:--Sir Thomas More's father had a countrey house at Gubbins
in Hertfordshire, which is in the familie still, who are still
Catholiques; whether he was borne there or no, non constat:--<from>
Seth Ward, episcopus Sarum.

[353]Educatus in aula cardinalis Morton, prout in Utopia pag. 49, 50.

Sir John Lenthall at Besilslye haz a rare and large picture of Hans
Holbein's painting in his hall there, where are the figures, as big as
the life, of Sir Thomas <More> and his father (a judge) and mother,
wife and children, and a long inscription, which gett Mr. Pigot to
transcribe, for it begins to be defaced.

Sir Thomas More, knight: Quaestiones duae:--

    --An chimaera bombinans in vacuo possit comedere secundas
        intentiones?

    --An averia capta in Withernamio sint replegiabilia?

Memorandum:--his folio, English.

Epigrammata, 16mo.

Utopia.--Vide in Utopia his titles of civis Londiniensis and vicecomes
Londiniensis.

His behaviour on the scaffold.

[354]☞ See about the later end of Erasmus' Epistolae (in the Antverp
edition, 8vo, 'tis in pagg. 503, 504, 505) an epitaph made for Sir
Thomas More, and another for his wife (as I thinke, never set up). But
be sure to obtaine a copie of the inscription under his picture and of
his family at Basilleigh, which Mr. Thomas Pigot hath, and he only can
help you to it. Therin are remarques of that family nowhere els to be
had.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[AD] Aubrey gives the coat: '..., a chevron between 3 heath-cocks ...'
wreathed with laurel. He adds: 'This coate of armes is in the hall at
New Inne, of which house I presume Sir Thomas was, according to the
education of former times.'

He adds the references 'see part iii, p. 45 b' (i.e. MS. Aubr. 8, fol.
97ᵛ in the life of Thomas Pigot), and 'vide A. Wood's _Antiq. Oxon._'




=Lancelot Morehouse= (16---1672).


[355]Mr. Launcelot Moorhouse, minister of Pertwood (40 _li._ per
annum), about 6 miles from Kilmanton, a very learned man, and a solid
and profound mathematician, wrote against Mr. Francis Potter's booke
of 666, and falls upon him, for that 25 is not the true roote, but the
propinque root; to which Mr. Potter replied with some sharpnes, and
that it ought not to be the true roote, for this agrees better with
his purpose. The manuscript pro and con Mr. Morehouse gave to Seth
Ward, bishop of Sarum, 1668; together with a MS. in folio (in French)
of legues between ... king of England and ... king of France, and a
prophecy concerning England, curiously written in Latin verse, one
sheet in 4to, which he rescued from the tayler's sheeres.

Mr. Moorhouse (of Cambridge) is dead and left his many excellent
mathematicall notes to his ingeniose friend, John Graunt, of Hindon.

He writt in 4to de Quadratura Circuli; wherin is a great deale of witt
and learning; but at last Dr. Davenant (his neighbour) evinced him of
his paralogisme. I would have it printed (for it is learnedly[356]
donne) to show where and how great witts may erre and be decieved.

He was a man of a very searching witt, and indefatigable at solving a
question, as I have heard Dr. Edward Davenant oftentimes say.

He was either of Clare-hall or King's Colledge. Westmoreland by birth.
Curate at Chalke to Mr. Waller. He was preferred by bishop <Humphrey>
Hinchman to Little Langford, where he dyed about 1672.




=Sir Thomas Morgan= (16---1679).


[357]The life of Sir Thomas Morgan will be printed in about three
weekes time by....

From Mr. Howe:--

[_Clarissimo fortissimoque Thomae Morgano, equiti aurato, imperatorum
hujus aetatis facile principi._

    Quae non in terris sensit gens bellica quantus
      Dux sit Morganus, compede, strage, fugâ?
    Ashleus, Austriacus, Condaeus, Monkus et ipse,
      Lesleiusque aquilas erubuêre tuas.
    Fairfaxus, Glencarnus, famaque Middletoni,
      Hopton jure prior sed tibi Marte minor.
    Victrices culpas delemus, vidimus ex quo
      Erecta auspiciis sceptra Britanna tuis,
    Et Carolum regnis reducem et Monkum modo fultum
      Auxiliis fusum Lamberitumque tuis.
    Inclytus Arthurus tibi conterranneus olim,
      Herôe Arthuro credimus esse satum.
          <by> ... Jones[358], B.D.]

[359]Sir Thomas Morgan:--Sir John Lenthall told me that at the taking
of Dunkyrke, Marshall Turenne, and, I thinke, Cardinall Mezarine too,
had a great mind to see this famous warrior. They gave him a visitt,
and wheras they thought to have found an Achillean or gigantique
person, they sawe a little man, not many degrees[360] above a
dwarfe[361], sitting in a hutt of turves, with his fellowe soldiers,
smoaking a pipe about 3 inches (or neer so) long, with a green
hatt-case on. He spake with a very exile tone, and did cry-out to the
soldiers, when angry with them, 'Sirrah, I'le cleave your skull!' as if
the wordes had been prolated by an eunuch.

He was of meane parentage in Monmouthshire. He went over to the
Lowe-Countrie warres about 16, being recommended by some friend of his
to some commander there, who, when he read the letter, sayd, 'What! has
my cosen ... recommended a _rattoon_ to me?' at which he tooke pett,
and seek't his fortune (as a soldier) in Saxon Weymar.

He spake Welch, English, French, High Dutch, and Lowe Dutch, but never
a one well. He seated himself at Cheuston, in Herefordshire.

[362]Sir Thomas Morgan: quaere Dr.[363] Jones.--Quaere Mr. Howe at
Peter Griffiths', in Yorke buildings, neer the staires: he was his
secretary and haz his memoires.--Quaere Mr. Jones for a copie of
Sir Thomas Morgan's epitaph.--He lies buried in St. Martyn's church
<in-the>-fields, London: quaere if his tombe is erected. Obiit about
1679.

[364]Thomas Morgan:--vide Mr. Howe at Mr. Griffyn's howse in York
buildings, below Mi. Kent, next house but one or two to the water: he
was his secretary and has his memoires. Quaere Mr. Jones for the copie
of his epitaph. He lies interred in St. Martin's church: quaere if his
tombe is erected. Obiit about 1679.




=William Morgan= (1622-16--).


[365]Mariana Morgan, ... daughter of major Morgan of Wells, was borne
there, New Yeare's Eve's eve, XX yeares since next New Yeare's Eve,
about 5 or 6 a clock P.M. She is a swidging lustie woman.

[366]William Morgan, first son of captain William Morgan, was borne at
Wells, the 6th of November, Saterday morning, something before day.
When he dyed he was 22 and as much as from the time of his birth. He
dyed last Xtmas, viz. 1674, the Fryday after XII day[367]. Memorandum
in 1670 he was very like to dye of a feaver. Anno ..., he maried (I
think not much above a yeare before his death). Anno ... he dyed.

[368]Thomas Morgan, second sonne, natus ibidem, September 14, 1657
(about midnight, his mother thinkes). He was idle and unfortunate, and
dyed 167-. Seemed to have Saturne much his enemie.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

These Morgans of Wells were 'cousins' of Aubrey: see in the life of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey. The William Morgan who is there mentioned I take to
be William Morgan (son of John Morgan, gent., of Worminster, co. Som.)
who matriculated at Christ Church on Dec. 13, 1639, aged 17, to be the
Captain (or Major) William Morgan of this notice. William Morgan, the
son, of this notice, is probably William Morgan (son of William Morgan
of Wells, co. Som., gent.) who matriculated at Trinity College, May 27,
1669, aged 16.




=John Morton= (1410-1500).


[369]Cardinal Morton:--lettre from A. Ettrick, esq., 9 July 1681:--'The
grant of Morton's coate was not to the cardinal, but I beleeve he
like other great new clergie-men tooke the libertie to use what coate
he pleased; but about the 7th of Henry VIII <1515>, the coate is
granted by three heralds to one of the same family with a _gratis
dictum_ recital in the grant of a descent of a pretty many auncestors
ingraffing him into the family of Bawtry (vide [Illustration][370] of
Bawtry) in Yorkshire. This Sir Edward Bysh shewed me in the Heralds'
Office.'--Quod vide.

Vide _Utopia_, pp. 49, 50, an immortall elogie; Sir Thomas More in aula
ejus educatus.

[371]In my last I gave you some memoirs of cardinall Morton, and that
the tradicion of the countrey people in Dorset, when I was a schooleboy
there at Blandford, was that he was a shoe-maker's son of Bere in com.
praedict.: but Sir William Dugdale ... sayes 'by no meanes I must putt
in writing hear-sayes.'

His coate is this[372], 'quarterly, gules and ermine, in the first
quarter a goat's head erased ...': which something resembles the
shoemakers' armes, who give 'three goates' heades,' as you may see in
the signe without Bocardo.

This coate of Moreton is in the west chamber of the Katherine-wheele
Inne at Great Wiccomb in Bucks, with (as I remember) the cardinall's
cappe.




=Thomas Mouffet= (1553-1604).


[373]... Muffett, M.Dr., lived in his later time at Bulbridge (at
the west end of Wilton--it belongs to the earle of Pembroke) at the
mannor-house there, which is a faire old-built house. This Bulbridge is
adjoyning to Wilton; the river[374] only parts it.

At this place he dyed and lyes ☞ buryed at Wilton, but no memoriall of
him--vide the Register.

The earl of Pembroke's steward told me that he findes by the old bookes
and accounts that a pension of ... was payd him yearly. He was one of
the learnedest physitians of that age. He writt a booke in Latin in
folio _de insectis_ which Dr. John Pell told me (quaere) heretofore was
first begun by a friar.... There was printed, long since his death, his
booke _Of Meates_ (in quarto, English), about 1649. Vide; I have it.

[375]... Mouffet:--quaere brother[376] Tom; vide the register at
Wilton; write to Mr. Gwyn[377] de hoc.--Thomae Moufeti, Londinatis,
Opera sumptibus Theodori de Mayerne edita, 1634.




=... Munday= (16---166-).


[378]Mr. ... Munday, a merchant, was a great traveller, and travelled
from Archangel to the East Indies by land. He wrote _Memoires_ of all
his journeys, a large folio, wherein he had draughts of their cities,
habits[379], customs, etc.

He had a great collection of natural rarities, coynes, prints, etc.

Mr. Baker[380] knew him.

He died at Penrhyn in Cornwall about 20 yeares since. Quaere for
them[381].




=Robert Murray= (1633-1725).


[382]Mr. Robert Murray is a citizen of London, a milliner, of the
company of cloathworkers. His father, a Scotchman; mother, English.
Borne in the Strand, Anno Dni. 1633, December; christened <Dec.> 12ᵗʰ.

The penny-post was sett up anno Domini 1680, Our Lady day, being
Fryday[383], a most ingeniose and usefull project. Invented by Mr. ...
Murray[384] first, and then Mr. Dockery[385] joyned with him. It was
set up Feb. 1679/80.

Mr. Murray[386] was formerly clarke to the generall company for the
revenue of Ireland, and afterwards clark to the committee of the grand
excise of England; and was the first that invented and introduced
into this city the club of commerce consisting of one of each trade,
whereof there were after very many erected and are still continued in
this city. And also continued[387] and sett-up the office or banke of
credit at Devonshire house in Bishopsgate Street without, where men
depositing their goods and merchandize were furnished with bills of
current credit on 2/3 or 3/4 of the value of the said goods answering
to the intrinsique value of money, whereby the deficiency of coin might
be fully subplyed: and for rendring the same current, a certaine or
competent number of traders (viz. 10 or 20 of each trade, wherof there
be 500 severall trades within the citty) were to be associated or
formed into such a society or company of traders as might amongst them
compleat the whole body of commerce, whereby any possest of the said
current credit might be furnisht amongst themselves with any kind of
goods or merchandise as effectually as for money could do elsewhere.




=Richard Napier= (1559-1634).


[388]Dr. Richard Napier[AE]:--he was no Doctor, but a divine (rector
Lindfordiensis) and practised physick--natus Maii 4, 1559, 11 h. 4´
P.M. in urbe Exoniae.

[389]Dr. Napier was uncle and godfather to Sir Richard Napier.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[AE] He is found at Exeter College ('Richard Napper'), aet. 17, Dec.
20, 1577. Aubrey intended to include his life in his collection, and
has mentioned it in the index to MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 9ᵛ:--'... Nepier,
M.D.: <his life is> donne by Mr. Ashmole.' Ashmole's, and Aubrey's,
interest in him arose from his astrological practice: 'nativities had
(Dec. 1681) from Elias Ashmole, esq., out of Dr. Napier's papers,' are
found in MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 121, 121ᵛ, and on a slip there.




=Sir Richard Napier= (1608-1675/6).


[390]Yesterday I was with Mr. Elias Ashmole, who tells me that Sir
Richard Napier[AF] was of Allsoules, and about 1642.

I writt to you from Mr. Ashmole in a former letter[AG] that Sir Richard
Napier is buryed at Lindford, but died at Besels-leigh; but before he
came thither, he lay at an inne at ..., where, when the chamberlain
brought him up to his chamber, and the Dr. look't on the bed and saw a
dead man lye in or on the bed--'What!' sayd he, 'do you lodge me where
a dead man lies?' Sayd the chamberlain, 'Sir, here is no dead man.' The
Dr. look't at it again, and saw _it was him selfe_. And from thence he
went (ill) to Besil's-leigh and died.

[391]On Sunday last I dined with Mr. Ashmole, who bids me answer
you[AH] _positively_ that Sir Richard Napier never did write anything,
and sayes he haz acquainted you thus much before by letter.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[AF] He was nephew of the preceding. He matriculated at Wadham in 1624;
was fellow of All Souls in 1628; and created M.D. in Nov. 1642.

[AG] On June 29, 1689: now in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 386ᵛ:--'Sir Richard
Napier was buried at Lynford, in Buckinghamshire: it was his manour,
which his sonne sold for 19,500 _li._'

[AH] This note is a postscript torn from a letter addressed, no doubt
to Anthony Wood, by 'your faithful friend, J. Aubrey.'




=Sir William Neale= (1610-1690/1).


[392]Sir William Neale, knight, skowt-master generall to king Charles
the first, died on the 24th of March last 1690/1, in Grayes Inne
lane, being 81 yeares old. He was buried, according to his desire,
in Convent-garden church, and lies at the west dore, first by the
christning pew. When he died, he was the oldest field-officer of king
Charles the first.

He was not lesse than 6 foot high: very beautifull in youth--I remember
him: and of great courage, but a great plunderer and cruell.

He lived in towne ever since the Plott, and that worthy generous
gentleman Edmund Wyld, esq., was much supporting to him. His mother and
Sir William were cosens german. But for these 5 yeares last past his
gowtes etc. emaciated him extremely; so that he did often put me in
mind of that of Ovid. Metamorph. <XV. 229>,

      Fletque Milo senior cum spectat inanes
    Illos, qui fuerant solidorum more tororum
    Herculeis similes, fluidos pendere lacertos.

He died poenitent.

He was the grandsonne of ... Neale, esq., of Wollaston near
Northampton, who maried one of Sir Edmund Conquest's sisters,
of Houghton-Conquest, Bedfordshire. Sir Francis Clarke of
Houghton-Conquest aforesaid (father of Mr. Edmund Wyld's mother, a
daughter and heir) maried another sister of Sir Edmund Conquest.

Sir William maried major-generall Egerton's sister, by whom he had
issue William, a lusty stout fellow, of the guards, who died about the
abdication, and two daughters.




=Richard Neile= (1562-1640).


[393]The father of ... Neile, archbishop of Yorke, was a
tallow-chandler in Westminster--from old major Cosh.




=William Neile= (1637-1670).


[394]I have sent now to Sir Paul Neile, whose father was archbishop
of Yorke, for his sonne. Memorandum:--a better-natured man[395] never
lived: for his worth Dr. <John> Wallis can better characterise him than
I can.

[396]William Neile, esq., gentleman of the privy chamber in ordinary to
king Charles the 2nd, eldest son to Sir Paul Neile, eldest son to the
archbishop of Yorke, was borne at Bishops-thorpe (a house belonging to
the archbishops of Yorke) neer Yorke, December the seventh, 1637; and
dyed at his father's howse in White Waltham in Berkshire, August 24th,
1670, and is buried in White Waltham church. Enquire of Dr. Wallis of
his rare invention, which he has printed in one of his bookes: never
before found out by man.




=John Newton= (1622-1678).


[397]Dr. Newton, now parson of Rosse in Herefordshire, told me that he
was of Edmund hall: yet living; and lives-like, for when his stomach
is out of order, he cures himselfe by eating a piece of hott roast
beefe off the spitt.--[398]Dr. J. Newton:--he told me he was borne in
Bedfordshire, but would not tell me where.

[399]... Newton, D.D., minister of Ross, dyed there on Christmas day
1678, and buried in the chancell at Rosse neer the middle of the south
wall. He was against learning of Latin in a mathematicall school.




=John Norden= (1548-1625).


[400]John Norden--from Mr. Bagford, a good antiquary, Mr. Crump's
acquaintance.

He lived at Fulham, and (perhaps) died there.

He made mappes of Middlesex, Hartfortshire, Surrey, and Hampshire, and
also Cornwall; and he did not only make the mappes aforesaid but hath
writt[401] descriptions of them, which Mr. Bagford hath, in quarto. The
description of Cornwall (I thinke) was not printed; but Dr. Gale of
Paule's schoole hath it in manuscript, quod N.B.

He printed a booke called a Preparative to Speculum Britanniae, in 8vo;
item, his Travellers Guide, in 4to.

Mr. Morgan, the herald painter, gives us an account in his Armorie,
that he had, in his custodie, Kent, Essex, Isle of Man, Isle of Wight,
and Hants.

In the end of Mr. Gregorie's posthumous workes, he gives us an account
of the excellency of Mr. Norden's mappes, and Saxton's too.

His dialogues I have, in 4to, printed first, 1610; dedicated to
<Robert> Cecil, earle of Salisbury, whose servant he was, (I suppose)
steward or surveyor.

Sometime or other I will looke into the church at Fulham: he died ('tis
thought) in King James the first raigne.

Mr. Wood! pray add this to the rest of the lives.




=Roger North= (1585?-1652).


[402]Captain Roger North was brother to <Dudley, 3rd> lord North. He
was a great acquaintance of Sir Walter Ralegh's and accompanied him in
his voyages. He was with him at Guiana, and never heard that word[403]
but he would fall into a passion for the miscariage of that action.

He was a great algebrist, which was rare in those dayes; but he had the
acquaintance of his fellow-traveller Mr. Hariot.

He and his voyages are much cited in.... Voyages in Latin in folio
(quaere nomen libri a domino J. Vaughan[404]).

He was a most accomplished gentleman.

He died in Fleet Street about anno Domini 1656 or 57, and buryed....

He had excellent collections and remarques of his voyages, which were
all unfortunately burnt in Fleet Street at the great conflagration of
the city.--From my <friend> Sir Francis North, Lord Chiefe Justice of
the Common Pleas, his nephew, and Edmund Wyld, esq., who knew him very
well.

He dyed about the time of the fire (?); quaere iterum.

This family speakes not well of Sir Walter Raleigh, that Sir Walter
designed to breake with the Spanyard, and to make himselfe popular in
England. When he came to ..., he could not show them where the mines of
gold were. He would have then gonne to the king of France (Lewis XIII),
but his owne men brought him back.

[405]Capt. North--quaere if of Oxon[406]: I thinke of University
College.




=Thomas North= (1535-1601).


[407]Mr. Thomas North, that translated Plutarch's Lives (my lord chief
justice[408] tells me) was great-uncle to his grandfather.




=Richard Norwood= (1590?-1675).


[409]Mr. Richard Norwood:--where he was born I cannot yet learn.

Norwood is an ancient family: about 300 yeares since St. Low maried
with a daughter and heire of them and quarters the coate in the
margent[410]. They flourish still in Gloucestershire, the mannour of
Lakhampton belonging to them.--'Tis probable that this learned Norwood
was that countreyman.

In his Epistle to the Reader before his Trigonometrie:--

    'but I am already sensible of the unfriendly dealings of some,
    even of our own countreymen, who, when these tables were
    printing and almost finished, came to the printing house and
    not onely tooke a sufficient view of them there, but carried
    away a president without the printer's leave, and have caused
    them to be printed beyond sea, the impression or a great part
    of it being already come over.

    Tower-hill, anno 1631, November 1.'

My edition is the third, 1656; and there hath been one since.

The Seaman's practice, containing a fundamental probleme in navigation
experimentally verified, namely, touching the compasse of the earth
and sea, and the quantity of a degree, in our English measure; also
an exact method or form of keeping a reckoning at sea in any kind or
manner of sayling, with certain tables and other rules usefull in
navigation; as also the plotting and surveying of places, the latitude
of the principal places in England, the finding of the currents at
sea and what allowance is to be given in respect of them, by Richard
Norwood, reader of the Mathematicks, London, 1655, 4to--dedicated to
Robert, earle of Warwick.

He, at his owne chardge, measured with a chaine from Barwick to Christ
Church (he sayes he came up in ten or eleven dayes) in order to the
finding the quantitie of a degree, and so the circumference of the
earth and sea, in our known measures--July 1, 1636.

He also published a treatise of the modern way of fortification, 163-,
in 4to.

By a letter from Nicholas, earle of Thanet, to me, concerning
his purchase in the Bermudas, not dated, but writ about 1674 or
5--thus:--'as to old Mr. Norwood, to whom the Royal Society would send
some quaeres, is lately dead, as his sonne informes me, who lately
went captaine in that ship wherein I sent my gardiner and vines to the
Bermudas. He was aged above 90.'

[411]Trigonometrie, both plain and sphaerical, by Richard Norwood,
reader of the Mathematicks. 'This seaventh edition being diligently
corrected; in divers difficult places explained; new table of the
starres' right ascentions and declinations added; and the whole worke
very much enlarged by the author himselfe.' Printed for William Fisher
at the Postern gate neer the Tower, etc., 1678.

'To the Reader. If any man thinke it should be a hinderance to them
who have been at the chardge to print that which Mr. Briggs hath begun
upon that subject, he may be pleased to take notice that though we
both handle the same thing, yet it is in a different manner, and there
is scarce any one proposition handled by us both; besides his is in
Latine, mine in English. Towerhill, anno 1631, November 1.'




=William Noy= (1577-1634).


[412]From Fabian Philips, esq.:--

Mr. attorney-generall Noy was a great lawyer and a great humorist.
There is a world of merry stories of him.

A countrey-fellow of Cumberland[413]....

He would play at spanne-counter with the taverne-barre-boy.

A countrey clowne asked for a good inne, and he bids him ride into
Lincoln's Inne, and asked if his horse went to hay or to grasse.

He caused the breeches of a bencher of Lincolne's Inne to be taken-in
by a tayler and made him beleeve that he had the dropsie.

One time he mett accidentally with Butler[414], the famous physitian
of Cambridge, at the earle of Suffolke's (Lord Treasurer[415]). They
were strangers to each other, and both walking in the gallerie. Noy was
wearied, and would be gonne. Butler would know his name. Noy had him to
the Peacock Taverne in Thames Street, and fudled all that day.

Another time Noy and Pine of Lincolne's Inne went afoot to Barnet with
clubbes in their hands, like countreyfellowes. They went to the Red
Lyon inne; the people of the house were afrayd to trust them, fearing
they might not pay.

[416]Ex registro Brandford, thus:--'William Noy, the king's attorney,
buried August the 11th day, 1634.' Buried under the communion table,
not alter-waies, in the chancell at New Brentford in the county of
Middlesex, under a stone broken; brasse lost and inscription.




=John Ogilby= (1600-1676).


[417]Mr. John Ogilby[AI] natus[418] November 17, 5ʰ 15´ mane, 1600.

[419]John Ogilby, esq., was borne at ... (quaere Mr. John Gadbury[AJ])
in Scotland, November ..., 1600, Scorpione ascendente. He was of a
gentleman's family, and bred to his grammar.

[420]<He> would not tell where in Scotland he was borne: quaere. He
sayd drollingly that he would have as great contests hereafter for the
place of his birth as of Homer's: but he made this rythme:--

    At ... cleare
    ther did I well fere
    where[421] ... man.

[422]Mr. Gadbury sayes that Mr. Ogilby told him (he was very sure) that
he was borne either in or neer Edinburgh. Sed tamen quaere de hoc of
Mr. Morgan his grandson.

[423]Mr. John Ogilby, borne ... in Scotland, of a gentleman's family;
bred a scholar. In[424] his youth bred to dancing at London: which he
afterwards professed. His father spent his estate and fell to decay;
and J. O. by his owne industry[XXXVIII.] at or about the age of 12 or
13, he relieved his parents.

[XXXVIII.] Spangles, needles.

[425]His father[AK] had spent his estate, and fell to decay, and was a
prisoner in the King's Bench, whom, together with his mother, his son
relieved by his owne industry, being then but about the age of 12 or
13 yeares. By the advantage of his sonne's industry, he raysed a small
summe of money, which he adventured in the lottery for the advancement
of the plantation in Virginia, anno ... and he gott out of prison by
this meanes. His motto (of his lott) was,

    'I am a poor prisoner, God wott,
    God send me a good lott,
    I'le come out of prison, and pay all my debt.'

It so happened that he had a very good lott, that did pay his debts.

[426]John (the son) bound himselfe apprentice to one Mr. Draper[427],
who kept a dancing-schoole in Grayes-Inne-Lane, and in short time
arrived to so great excellency in that art, that he found meanes to
purchase his time of his master and sett up for himselfe.

When the duke of Buckingham's great masque[428] was represented at
court (vide Ben Jonson), anno ... (quaere), he was chosen (among the
rest) to performe some extraordinary part in it, and high-danceing,
i.e. vaulting and cutting capers, being then in fashion, he,
endeavouring to doe something extraordinary, by misfortune of a false
step when he came to the ground, did spraine a veine on the inside of
his leg, of which he was lame ever after, which gave an occasion to say
that 'he was an excellent dancing master, and never a good leg.'

He taught 2 of the lord Hopton's (then Sir Ralph) sisters to dance,
then at Witham in Somersetshire; and Sir Ralph taught[429] him to
handle the pike and musket, scil. all the postures.

[430]Anno[431] ... (the yeare before lord Strafford went
to Ireland[432], Deputie) he kept a dancing school in the
Black-Spread-Eagle Court (then an inne) in Grayes Inne lane. Mr. John
Lacy, the player, from whom I take this information, was his apprentice.

[433]In the yeare ..., he went over into Ireland to Thomas, earle of
Strafford, Lord Liuetenant there, and was there enterteined to teach
in that family. And here it was that first he gave proofs of his
inclination to poetry, by paraphrasing upon some of Æsop's fables. (He
writt a fine hand.) He had[434] a warrant from the Lord Livetenant to
be Master of the Ceremonies for that kingdome; and built a little[435]
theatre in St. Warburgh street, in Dublin. It was a short time before
the rebellion brake out, by which he lost all, and ran thorough many
hazards, and particularly being like to have been blow'n-up at the
castle of Refarnum neer Dublin.

[436]Anno 16--he went into Ireland with the lord Strafford (Deputy)
and rode in his troupe of guards, as one of my lord's gentlemen, which
gave occasion of his writing an excellent copie of verses called _The
description of a trouper_, which gett[437].

Mr. J. O. was[438] in the Lord Lieutenant's troope of guards, and
taught his lady and children to dance; that was his place. And he there
made those excellent verses _of the Troupe_r (quaere). 'Twas there
he....

                          knees 'gainst knees
                           (umbonibus umbo).

Upon this Mr. Chantrel[XXXIX.] putt him upon learning the Latin tongue
(in the 40 aetat. +), and taught him himself and tooke a great deale of
paines with him. This was the first time he began his Latin. He stayed
in Ireland a good while after the warres broke-out.

[XXXIX.] Mr. Chantrel[439], chaplaine to Sir George Ratcliffe,
favourite. Sir George Ratcliffe was afterwards the duke of York's
governour in France.

[440]After John Ogilby had built the theatre at Dublin, he was undon
at the Irish rebellion. He was wreckt at sea, and came to London very
poor, and went on foot to Cambridge.

[441]Mr. J. Ogilby wrote at Dublin (being then of the gaurdes of the
earle of Strafford) the character of a trooper, in English verse, which
is very witty: Mr. Morgan hath promised to gett it for me. He built the
theatre at Dublin. He was undon at the Irish rebellion; returning to
England, was wreckt at sea, and came to London very poor and went on
foot to Cambridge.

[442]He wrote a play at Dublin, call'd _The Merchant of Dublin_, never
printed.

[443]He came into England about the yeare 1648 (vide the date of his
Virgil, 8vo). He printed[XL.] Virgill, translated by himselfe into
English verse, 8vo, 164-, dedicated to the right honourable William,
lord marquesse of Hertford, who loved him very well.

[XL.] Virgil, 8vo; Aesop, in 4to, next.--MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 20.

After he had translated Virgil, he learned Greeke[XLI.] of Mr.
Whitfield[444], a Scotch bishop's son, and grew so great a proficient
in it that he fell-to to translate Homer's Iliads, 1660.

[XLI.] Mr. Ogilby learnt Greeke in 1653.--MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 121ᵛ.

Next, as if by a prophetique spirit, foreseeing the restauration of
King Charles IIᵈ, and also the want there might be of Church Bibles,
he[445]printed the fairest impression, and the most correct of English
Bibles, in royall and imperiall paper, that ever was yet donne.

He printed and published his majestie's entertainment at his
coronation, in folio with cutts, 1662.

The same yeare (1662) he went into Ireland again, being then, _by
patent_ (before, but by _warrant_) master of the revells, having
disputed his right with Sir William Davenant, who had gott a graunt,
and built a noble theatre at Dublin, which cost 2000 _li._, the former
being ruined[446] in the troubles.

His Odysses came out in 1665. People did then suspect, or would not
beleeve that 'twas he was the author of the paraphrase upon Æsop,
and to convince them he published a 2ᵈ volume, which he calles his
Æsopiques, which[447] he did during the sicknesse, in his retirement at
Kingston upon Thames, after he had published Homer's Iliads and Odysses.

His History of China, in fol., anno ... (before the fire); then his
History of Japan.

The generall and dreadfull conflagration burn't all that he had, that
he was faine to begin the world again, being then at best worth 5 _li._

He had such an excellent inventive and prudentiall witt, and master
of so good addresse, that when he was undon he could not only shift
handsomely (which is a great mastery[448]), but he would make such
rationall proposalls that would be embraced by rich and great men, that
in a short time he could gaine a good estate again, and never failed in
any thing he ever undertooke but allwayes went through with profits and
honour[449].

Being thus utterly undon again by the fire, he made his proposalls for
the printing of a faire English _Atlas_[450], of which he lived to
finish the Historys of Africa, America, and part of Asia. And then,
being encouraged by the king and the nobility to make[451] an actuall
survey of England and Wales[AL], he proceeded in it so far as to an
actuall survey of the roads both in England and Wales, which composed
his ... volume of his _Britannia_, published....

[452]Mr. John Ogilby died Sept. 4, 1676; and was buried in the vault at
St. Bride's.

[453]Vide his obiit in Almanack[454] 1675: quaere Mr. Lacy.

[455]Anno ... John Ogilby maried ..., the daughter of ... Fox[XLII.],
of Netherhampton, neer Wilton in com. Wilts, who was borne as he was
wont to say 'in the first Olympiad,' scil. when the first race was ran
at Sarum in Henry[456], earle of Pembroke's time. She had only one
daughter by him, maried to ... Morgan, who left a son who now suceeds
his grandfather as his majestie's cosmographer. She dyed in London ...
being aged ... (neer 90[457]).

[XLII.] Servant to the earl of Pembroke, a good liverie.

[458]His wife dyed 3 or 4 dayes before Xtmas 1677, aetatis
circiter[459] 112.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[AI] This life of Ogilby is found confusedly in two drafts in MS. Aubr.
7, foll. 19ᵛ-20ᵛ, and MS. Aubr. 8, foll. 44-47ᵛ.

In MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 19ᵛ, and in MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 44, Aubrey gives
the coat: '..., a lion passant gardant crowned ..., a mullet for
difference'; and notes that 'the crest is a 1/2 virgin in an earle's
coronet holding a castle.'

[AJ] Gadbury, Aubrey thought, must have been told the place of Ogilby's
birth with a view to constructing his horoscope.

[AK] The first draft, in MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 20, runs:--

'His father was then a prisoner at the King's bench; by the advantage
of his son's industry, raysed a small some of money, which he
adventured in the lottery (in such a yeare ...--since 1600--quaere
annum) for the advancement of the plantation in Virginia: but he gott
out of prison by this meanes. His motto was

        I am a poor prisoner, God wott:
        God send me a good lott[460]
    I'le come out of prison and pay all my debt.

It so happened that he had a very good lott, that pay<d> all his debt.'

[AL] Aubrey came near being employed on this survey. Writing on Aug.
12, 1672, MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 181, he says:--

'I had gone sooner into Kent, but Dr. Wren, my deare friend, without my
knowledge contrived an employment for me, which he referred to me to
consider of it. So I shall till Michaelmas terme.

'Tis this.--Mr. Ogilby is writing the history of all England: the map
is mending already. Now the Dr. told him if that were all, it would be
no very great matter. He was pleased to tell him that he could not meet
with a fitter man for that turne then J. A. Now it's true it suites
well enough with my genius; but he is a cunning Scott, and I must deale
warily with him, with the advice of my friends. It will be February
next before I begin, and then between that and November followeing I
must <s>curry over all England and Wales.... The king will give me
protection and letters to make any inquiries, or etc.'




=Thomas Osborne, Earl of Danby= (1631/2-1712).


[461]Lord Treasurer, Thomas, earle of Danby, natus A.D. 1631º, Febr.
19º, hor. 15 min. 53 P.M.--latit. 54.

[462]'20 Febr., 1631/2, fower a clock in the morn.'--I take this to
be the Lord Treasurer's <nativity>, scil. Thomas, earle of Danby.
Respondet--'tis so.




=William Oughtred= (1574-1660).


[463]Gulielmus Oughtred[AM] natus 5 Martii 1574, 5ʰ P.M.

[464]Mr. Oughtred:--Mr. <John> Sloper tells me that his father was
butler of Eaton Colledge: he remembers him, a very old man.

[465]William Oughtred:--vide Henry Coley's _Astrologie_.--A note from
my honoured and learned friend Thomas Flud, esq., who had been High
Sheriff of Kent, _scilicet_, he was Mr. Oughtred's acquaintance. He
told me that Mr. Oughtred confessed to him that he was not satisfied
how it came about that one might foretell by the starres, but so it was
that it fell out true as he did often by his experience find. Mr. T.
Flud obiit....

[466]_This[467] from Mr. Uniades, who was his scholar._

[Mr. Oughtred's children:--

  1. William.
  2. Henrey: haz a son (of the Custom-house).
  3. Benjamin: a bachelor: yet living.
  4. Simon.
  5. Edward.
  6. George.
  7. John.
  Marget.
  Judeth: married a glazier.
  Elizabeth.

One of them <married> to Christopher Brookes of Oxford, a
mathematical-instrument-maker.]

[468]Mr. William Oughtred, B.D., Cambr., was borne at Eaton, in
Buckinghamshire, neer Windsor, Anno Domini 1574, March the fifth, 5
hours P.M.

His father taught to write at Eaton, and was a scrivener; and
understood common arithmetique, and 'twas no small helpe and
furtherance to his son to be instructed in it when a schoole-boy. His
grandfather came from the north for killing a man. The last knight of
the family was one Sir Jeffrey Oughtred. I thinke a Northumberland
family (quaere).

Anno Domini ... he was chosen to be one of the King's scholars at Eaton
Colledge (vide register). A.D. ... he went to King's Colledge, in
Cambridge.

Anno aetatis 23, he writt there his Horologiographia Geometrica, as
appeares by the title.

Anno Domini ... he was instituted and inducted into the rectory or
parsonage of Albury, in com. Surrey, lett for[469] a hundred pounds per
annum: he was pastor of this place fifty yeares.

He maried ... Caryl (an ancient family in those parts), by whom he
had nine sonnes (most lived to be men) and four daughters. None of his
sonnes he could make[470] scholars.

He was a little man, had black haire, and blacke eies (with a great
deal of spirit). His head[471] was always working. He would drawe lines
and diagrams on the dust.

His oldest son Benjamin, who lives in the house with my cosen Boothby
(who gives him his dyet) and now an old man, he bound apprentice to a
watchmaker; who did worke pretty well, but his sight now failes for
that fine worke. He told me that his father did use to lye a bed till
eleaven or twelve a clock, with his doublet on, ever since he can
remember. Studyed late at night; went not to bed till 11 a clock; had
his tinder box by him; and on the top of his bed-staffe, he had his
inke-horne fix't. He slept but little. Sometimes he went not to bed in
two or three nights, and would not come downe to meales till he had
found out the _quaesitum_.

He was more famous abroad for his learning, and more esteemed, then
at home. Severall great mathematicians came over into England on
purpose to converse[472] with him. His countrey neighbours (though they
understood not his worth) knew that there must be extraordinary worth
in him, that he was so visited by foreigners.

When Mr. Seth Ward, M.A. and Mr. Charles Scarborough, D.M., came (as in
pilgrimage, to see him and admire him)--they lay at the inne at Sheeres
(the next parish)--Mr. Oughtred had against their comeing prepared a
good dinner, and also he had dressed himselfe, thus, an old red[473]
russet cloath-cassock that had been black in dayes of yore, girt with a
old leather girdle, an old fashion russet hatt, that had been a bever,
tempore reginae Elizabethae. When learned foreigners came and sawe
how privately he lived, they did admire and blesse themselves, that a
person of so much worth and learning should not be better provided for.

Seth Ward, M.A., a fellow of Sydney Colledge in Cambridge (now bishop
of Sarum), came to him, and lived with him halfe a yeare (and he would
not take a farthing for his diet), and learned all his mathematiques of
him. Sir Jonas More was with him a good while, and learn't; he was but
an ordinary logist before. Sir Charles Scarborough was his scholar; so
Dr. John Wallis was his scholar; so was Christopher Wren his scholar;
so was Mr. ... Smethwyck, Regiae Societatis Socius. One Mr. Austin (a
most ingeniose man) was his scholar, and studyed so much that he became
mad, fell a laughing, and so dyed, to the great griefe of the old
gentleman. Mr. ... Stokes, another scholar, fell mad[474], and dream't
that the good old gentleman came to him, and gave[475]him good advice,
and so he recovered, and is still well. Mr. Thomas Henshawe, Regiae
Societatis Socius, was his scholar (then a young gentleman). But he did
not so much like any as those that tugged ☞ and tooke paines to worke
out questions. He taught all free.

He could not endure to see a scholar write an ill hand; he taught them
all presently to mend their hands. Amongst others Mr. T. H.[476] who
when he came to him wrote a lamentable hand, he taught to write very
well. He wrote a very elegant hand, and drew his schemes most neatly,
as they had been cut in copper. His father (no doubt) was an ingeniose
artist at the pen and taught him to write so well.

He was an astrologer, and very lucky in giving his judgements on
nativities; he would say, that he did not understand the reason why it
should be so, but so it would happen; he did beleeve that some genius
or spirit did help. ☞ He has asserted the rational way of dividing
the XII houses according to the old way, which (the originall) Elias
Ashmole, esq., haz of his owne handwriting; which transcribe. Captaine
George Wharton hath inserted it in his Almanack, 1658 or 1659.

The countrey people did beleeve that he could conjure, and 'tis like
enough that he might be well enough contented to have them thinke so. I
have seen some notes of his owne handwriting on Cattan's Geomantie.

He has told bishop Ward, and Mr. Elias Ashmole (who was his neighbour),
that 'on this spott of ground,' (or 'leaning against this oake,' or
'that ashe,') 'the solution of such or such a probleme came into my
head, as if infused by a divine genius, after I had thought on it
without successe for a yeare, two, or three.'

Ben Oughtred told me that he had heard his father say to Mr. Allen (the
famous mathematicall instrument-maker), in his shop, that he had found
out the Longitude; _sed vix credo_.

Nicolaus Mercator, Holsatus (whose mathematicall writings ...), went
to see him few yeares before he dyed. 'Twas about midsommer, and the
weather was very hott, and the old gentleman had a good fire, and used
Mr. Mercator with much humanity (being exceedingly taken with his
excellent mathematicall witt), and one piece[477] of his courtesie was,
to be mighty importunate with him to sett on his upper hand next the
fire; he being cold (with age) thought he[478] had been so too.

He[479] was a great lover of chymistry, which he studyed before his son
Ben can remember, and continued it; and told John Evelyn, of Detford,
esq., R.S.S., not above a yeare before he dyed, that if he were but
five yeares (or three yeares) younger, he doubted not to find out the
philosopher's stone. He used to talke much of the mayden-earth[XLIII.]
for the philosopher's stone. It was made of the harshest cleare water
that he could gett, which he lett stand to putrify, and evaporated
by cimmering[480]. Ben tended his furnaces. He has told me that his
father would sometimes say that he could make the stone. Quicksilver
refin'd and strain'd, and gold as it came naturall over[XLIV.]----

[XLIII.] Quaere for what he sayd it was good?

[XLIV.] This line is imperfect. It is blurred in my notes.

The old gentleman was a great lover of heraldry, and was well
knowne[481] with the heralds at their office, who approved his
descent[XLV.].

[XLV.] Dr. <Richard> Blackburne haz his genealogie, of his owne
drawing. He loved heraldry.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 8.

Memorandum:--he struck-out above halfe of the accedence, and wrote new
instead. He taught a gentleman in halfe a yeare to understand Latin, at
Mr. Duncombe's his parishioner. Quaere his daughter Brookes at Oxford
for it[482].

[483]His wife was a penurious woman, and would not allow him to burne
candle after supper, by which meanes many a good notion is lost, and
many a probleme unsolved; so that Mr. <Thomas> Henshawe, when he was
there, bought candle, which was a great comfort to the old man.

The right honᵇˡᵉ Thomas[484] Howard, earle of Arundel and Surrey, Lord
High Marshall of England, was his great patron[485], and loved him
intirely. One time they were like to have been killed together by the
fall at Albury of a grott, which fell downe but just as they were come
out. ☞ My lord had many grotts about his house, cutt in the sandy sides
of hills, wherin he delighted to sitt and discourse.

In the time of the civill warres the duke of Florence invited him over,
and offered him 500 _li._ per annum; but he would not accept of it,
because of his religion.

Notwithstanding all that has been sayd of this excellent man, he was
in danger to have been sequestred, and ... Onslowe that was a great
stickler against the royalists and a member of the House of Commons and
living not far from him--he translated his _Clavis_ into English and
dedicated it to him to clawe with him, and it did soe his businesse
and saved him from sequestration. Now this Onslowe was no scholar and
hated by the country[486] for bringing his countrymen of Surry into the
trap of slaughter when so many petitioners were killed at Westminster
and on the roads in pursuite, anno Domini 16--.

I have heard his neighbour ministers say that he was a pittiful
preacher; the reason was because he never studyed it, but bent all
his thoughts on the mathematiques; but when he was in danger of being
sequestred for a royalist, he fell to the study of divinity, and
preacht (they sayd) admirably well, even in his old age.

He was a good Latinist and Graecian, as appears in a little treatise of
his against one Delamaine, a joyner, who was so sawcy to write against
him (I thinke about his circles of proportion): upon which occasion I
remember I have seen, many yeares since, twenty or more good verses
made[487], which begin to this purpose:--

    Thus may some mason or rude carpenter[488]
    Putt into the ballance his rule and compasses
    'Gainst learned Euclid's pen, etc.

Enquire for them and insert them.

Before he dyed he burned a world of papers, and sayd that the world was
not worthy of them; he was so superb. He burned also severall printed
bookes, and would not stirre, till they were consumed. His son Ben was
confident he understood magique. Mr. Oughtred, at the Custom House,
(his grandson) has some of his papers; I myselfe have his Pitiscus,
imbelished with his excellent marginall notes, which I esteeme as a
great rarity. I wish I could also have got his Bilingsley's Euclid,
which John Collins sayes was full of his annotations.

He dyed the 13ᵗʰ day of June, 1660, in the yeare of his age
eighty-eight + odde dayes. Ralph Greatrex, his great friend, the
mathematicall instrument-maker, sayed he conceived he dyed with joy
for the comeing-in of the king, which was the 29ᵗʰ of May before.
'And are yee sure he is restored?'--'Then give me a glasse of sack
to[489]drinke his sacred majestie's health.' His spirits were then
quite upon the wing to fly away. The 15ᵗʰ of June he was buried in the
chancell at Albury, on the north side neer the cancelli. I had much
adoe to find the very place where the bones of this learned and good
man lay (and 'twas but 16 yeares after his death). When I first ask't
his son Ben, he told me that truly the griefe for his father's death
was so great, that he did not remember the place--now I should have
thought it would have made him remember it the better--but when he had
putt on his considering cap (which was never like his father's), he
told as aforesaid, with which others did agree. There is not to this
day any manner of memorial for him there, which is a great pitty. I
have desired Mr. John Evelyn, etc., to speake to our patrone, the duke
of Norfolk, to bestowe a decent inscription of marble on him, which
will also perpetuate his grace's fame. I asked Ben concerning the
report[490] of his father's dyeing a Roman Catholique: he told me that
'twas indeed true that when he was sick some priests came from my lord
duke's (then Mr. Henry Howard, of Norfolk) to him to have discoursed
with him, in order to his conversion to their church, but his father
was then past understanding. Ben was then by, he told me.

His _Clavis Mathematica_ was first dedicated to the lord <Thomas[491]>
Howard, earle of Arundel and Surrey, and Lord Marshall of England, anno
Domini MDCXXXI, London, apud Thomam Harperum.

His _Clavis Mathematica, denuo limata sive potius fabricata_ was
printed by the said Thomas Harper, 1648.

_Editio tertia auctior et emendatior_ was at Oxford, 1652; where Dr.
John Wallis, the Savillian professor, corrected the presse. The old
gentleman in his Preface to the Reader mentioned with much respect Seth
Ward (Savillian professor of Astronomy), Dr. Charles Scarborough, John
Wallis, Mr. Christopher Wren, and Mr. Robert Wood.

He writt a stitch't pamphlet about 163(?4) against ... Delamaine.

His first edition of his Circles of Proportion was in 4to, and
dedicated to Sir Kenelm Digby, printed.... The second edition was at
Oxford, 165-.

He writt a little pamphlett in 8vo, viz. _The new artificiall
gauging-rod, with the use therof_, London, printed by Augustin
Matthewes, 1633. Ben, <his son>, gave me a copie of it; but this art is
since much improved.

He wrote a little treatise of watchmaking for the use of his son
Benjamin, who told me that Mr. Horton of Whitehall, of the Woodyard,
haz the true copie of it.

Memorandum:--about 1678 were printed at Oxon at the Theatre some
opuscula of his....

I have heard Mr. Hobbes say, and very truely, that with all his great
skill in Algebra, he did never adde one proposition to Geometrie: he
could bind up a bundle well.

Mr. John Sloper, vicar of Broad Chalke (which is in the gift of King's
College, Cambridge) tells me that Mr. Oughtred's father was the pantler
of Eaton College.

Memorandum:--there is a booke of lives in folio, by ... Lloyd, and
among others this Mr. Oughtred: which see.

Memorandum:--Richard Blackbourne, of London, M.D., hath Mr. W.
Oughtred's genealogie of his owne draweing; gett it for Mr. Elias
Ashmole.

  [492]Worthy Sir,

I made bold lately when I sent my book in a leter to Mr. Wood[493]
to nominate you and Mr. Wallis together with him, to whose judgment
and discretion I commit all my right and interest for the printing
therof at Oxford. I nowe have sent the Epistle, which, though written
long since, yett was soe mislayed and mingled with many other papers,
that I thought it lost, and light but lately upon it. Therin I make
noe unloving mention of your self and Dr. Scarbrough, whose surname I
remember not.

I hope neyther of you will take my officiousnesse in evell part. Yett
yf anything shall displease, you are intreated of me to alter it or
raze it with a blott; but yf in and by your suffrage it maye passe, I
would intreat you to supplie the Doctor's surname.

I have another suit, and that is in behalf of Mr. Brookes, late chosen
manciple of Wadham Colledg, that you would be pleased to commend him
and give him what countenance you can with the Warden of the house.
He is a very honest man, well travelled and experienced in the world,
and is also an exact workman in his trade of making mathematical
instruments in metall.

Sir, you will be pleased to remember my best respects to Mr. Wallis and
favourably to pardon this troublesome interruption of him who am,

                                    Your truly loving freind to my power,
                                               WILLIAM OUGHTRED.

  Aldburie
    April 19, 1651.

To my very worthy and loving freind, Mr. Seth Ward, at Wadham Colledg
in Oxford, present.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[AM] Aubrey gives in colours the coat: 'gules, a cross moline or
(vide the Heralds' office if any charge on the cross)'; and notes
that the 'crest' is 'a head like a hare's head.' He adds also the
references:--(_a_) 'vide his life writt by ..., in 8vo'; (_b_) 'quaere
Mr. Elias Ashmole for his nativity.' He has drawn the figure for the
insertion of the planetary signs, and left it blank.




=William Outram= (1625-1679).


In Westminster Abby south aisle, white marble inscription.[494]

                              Prope jacet
                       Gulielmus Outram, S.T.P.
          ex agro Derbiensi, collegiorum apud Cantabrigienses
         S. et individuae Trinitatis et Christi socius, hujus
            ecclesiae canonicus et Leycestr. archidiaconus,
                   Theologus consummatus et omnibus
          numeris absolutus, Scriptor nervosus et accuratus,
        Concionator egregius et assiduus primo in agro Lincoln.
         postea Londini et tandem apud S. Margaretam Westmon.
            ubi confecit postremum vitae suae cursum magna
         cum laude nec minore fructu. Sed in tantis laboribus
            et animi contentione dum sacrarum literarum et
          sanctorum patrum studio ardebat ut in renum dolores
           inciderit, quibus diu afflictus et tandem fractus
                   aequissimo animo e vita discessit
                     Aug. XXIII anno Dni MDCLXXIX
                       postquam impleverat annum
                        quinquagesimum quartum.

His grave-stone (a faire black marble) is not far off from the
above-mentioned inscription. There is written on it thus, viz.:--

...

He was a tall spare leane pale consumptive man; wasted himself much, I
presume, by frequent preaching.

Scripsit....




=John Overall= (1560-1619).


[495]Dr. Overall and his wife:--

Dr. <John> Overall was deane of St. Paules, London.

I see his picture in[496] the rationale writt by <Anthony> Sparrow,
bishop of Exon, in the beginning wherof are the effigies[497] of
L<ancelot> Andrews, bishop of Winton, Mr. <Richard> Hooker, and John
Overall, bishop of Norwich--before which is writt _Ecclesiae et
Liturgiae Anglicanae vindices_. Quaere if this deane was that bishop.

I know not what he wrote or whether he was any more than a
common-prayer Doctor; but most remarqueable by his wife, who was the
greatest beautie in her time in England. That she was so I have it
attested from the famous limmer[498] Mr. <John> Hoskins[499] and other
old painters, besides old courtiers. She was not more beautifull than
she was obligeing and kind, and was so tender-hearted that (truly) she
could scarce denie any one. She had (they told me) the loveliest eies
that ever were seen, but wondrous wanton. When she came to court or
to the playhouse, the gallants would so flock round her. Richard, the
earle of Dorset, and his brother Edward, since earle, both did mightily
adore her. And by their report he must have had a hard heart that did
not admire her. Bishop Hall sayeth in his Meditations that 'there is
none so old that a beautifull person loves not; nor so young whom a
lovely feature moves not.'

The good old deane, notwithstanding he knew well enough that he was
horned, loved her infinitely: in so much that he was willing she should
enjoy what she had a mind to.

Among others who were charmed by her was Sir John Selby of Yorkshire.
1656, old Mris Tyndale (of the Priory near Easton-piers), who knew
her, remembres a song made of her and Sir John, part whereof was this,
vizt.:--

    The deane of Paule's did search for his wife,
      And where d'ee thinke he found her?...[500]

etc.

On these two lovers was made this following copie of pastorall verses
(vide the ballad-booke _in Museo Sheldoniano_[501]), e.g.

    [502]Downe lay the shepherd swaine
      So sober and demure,
    Wishing for his wench againe[503]
      So bonny and so pure,
    With his head on hillock lowe
      And his armes akimboe,
    And all was for the losse of his
      Hye nonny nonny noe.

    His teares fell as thinne
      As water from the still,
    His haire upon his chinne
      Grew like thyme upon a hill,
    His cherry cheekes[504] pale as snowe
      Did testifye his mickle woe,
    And all was for the losse of his
      Hye nonny nonny noe.

    Sweet she was, as kind a love
      As ever fetter'd swayne;
    Never such a daynty one
      Shall man enjoy again.
    Sett a thousand on a rowe
      I forbid that any showe
    Ever the like of her
      Hey nonny nonny noe.

    Face she had of filberd hue,
      And bosom'd[505] like a swan;
    Back she had of bended ewe,
      And wasted by a span.
    Haire she had as black as crowe
      From the head unto the toe
    Downe, downe, all over her
      Hye nonny nonny noe.

    With her mantle tuck't-up high
      She foddered her flock
    So bucksome and alluringly,
      Her knee upheld her smock.
    So nimbly did she use to goe,
      So smooth she danc't on tip-toe,
    That all men were fond of her
      Hye nonny nonny noe.

    [506]She smiled like a Holy-day
      And simpred like the Spring,
    She pranck't it like a popingaie
      And like a swallow sing,
    She trip't it like a barren doe,
      She strutted like a gor-crowe,
    Which made the men so fond of her
      Hye nonny nonny noe.

    To sport it on the merry downe
      To daunce the lively Haye
    To wrastle for a green gowne
      In heate of all the daye
    Never would she say me no
      Yet me thought I had thô
    Never enough of her
      Hye nonny nonny noe.

    But gonne she is, the prettiest[507] lasse
      That ever trod on plaine.
    What ever hath betide of her
      Blame not the shepherd swayne
    For why? she was her owne foe
      And gave her selfe the overthrowe
    By being so franke of her
      Hye nonny nonny noe.

                Finis.




=Sir Thomas Overbury= (1581-1613).


[508]Sir Thomas Overbury, knight:--ex registro capellae Turris Lond.,
scilicet. 'Anno Domini 1613, Sir Thomas Overbury, poysoned, buryed
September 15ᵗʰ.'

His father was one of the judges of South Wales, viz. Caermarthen,
Cardigan, and Pembroke circuites. He lived in his later time at
Burghton on the hill in Glocestershire. Sir Giles Overbury was his
eldest brother, who dyed in London in St. Clements Danes parish about
1651 or 2.

Scripsit:--Characters, Of education of youth, a stitch't 8vo.
Translated Ovid _de remedio amoris_--which I have ('twas one of old Dr.
Kettle's bookes).

       Sir Nicholas Overbury, _m._ ... Palmer.
                judge.         |
                               |
       +-------------------+---+-----------------------+
       |                   |                           |
  1. Sir Giles.   2. Sir Thomas, (sine prole).   3. Walter, of Barton.
       |                                               |
       |                                          +----+----+
  Sir Thomas (orbus).                             |         |




=Charles Pamphlin= (1649-1678).


[509]This is the copie of his mother's owne handwriting:--

'Charles Pamphlin was borne the last day of August before day, the
howre I did justly know but I guesse it might be about 3 or 4 a clock
in the morning, being Fryday the August after the king was beheaded;
which I thinke was 29 yeares since, last August.'

He was hanged in Convent Garden on a gibbet, for stealing his
Majestie's chapell-plate, May 22, 1678.




=John Partridge= (1643/4-1715).


[510]John Partridge, astrologue, the son of ... Partridge (yet living,
1680, an honest waterman at Putney[511] in Surrey).

He was borne, as by his scheme[512] appeares, January the 18ᵗʰ, 1643/4,
lat. London.

He was taught[513] to read, and a little to write. He learn'd no
farther then _As in praesenti_.

He was bound apprentice to a shoe-maker in ..., anno aetat....; where
he was kept hard to his trade.

At 18 he gott him a Lillie's grammar, and Goldman's dictionary, and a
Latin bible, and Ovid's Metamorphoses.

He is of an excellent healthy constitution and great temperance, of
indefatigable industrie, and sleepes but ... houres.

In ... yeeres he made himselfe a competent master of the Latin tongue,
well enough to reade any astrologicall booke, and quickly became a
master of that science. He then studyed the Greek tongue, and also
the Hebrew, to neither of which he is a stranger. He then studyed
good authors in physique, and intends to make that his profession and
practyse; but is yet (1680) a shoemaker in Convent Garden.

_Scripsit_, viz.:--

first, The Hebrew Kalendar, 1678.

Ecclesilogia (almanack), 1679.

The same againe, 1680.

Vade Mecum, 8vo.

The King of France his nativity.

A discourse of two moones.

Mercurius Coelestis (almanack), 1681.

Prodromus, a discourse of the conjunction of Saturn and Mars, anno 1680.




=James Peele.=


[514]Maister James Peele--'tis a folio, 1569:--

¶The pathewaye to perfectnes in th' accomptes of debitour and
creditour, in manner of a dialogue very pleasant and profitable for
merchauntes and all other that minde to frequent the same, once again
set forth and very much enlarged by James Peele, citizen and salter of
London, Clercke of Christes Hospitall, practiser and teacher of the
same, imprinted at London in Paule's church-yard by Thomas Purfoote,
dwelling at the signe of the Lucrece, Aug. 16.

He is drawne before his booke in his gowne and a cap (scilicet, like
the cappes the undergraduates weare), short haire and long beard.

It is dedicated to the right worshipful master John Mershe, esq.,
governour, the assistants, and companie of the Merchaunte Adventurers
of England.

In the dialogue between the merchant and the schoolemaster, the
merchant thanks him and sayes 'It is now street time, wherfore I must
begonne.' In those times, before the Royal Exchange was built by Sir
Thomas Gresham, the merchants did meet in the street as now a dayes
at the Exchange. The place was what we now call the old Change; but I
believe the street was then broader than it is now.

In those dayes[515] they did alwaies upon the top of the first clean
leafe in the inventorie booke write thus:--

                      'In the name of God, Amen.
                                 1566
                       December the xxxi daye.'




=John Pell= (1610/1-1685).


    <When Aubrey had finished the first sketch of this life he
    submitted it for revision to Dr. Pell, who made several
    corrections. To these Aubrey draws attention by a note:--'This
    is Dr. Pell's owne hand-writing:' it is a neat print-like hand.
    These corrections in the text here are enclosed in square
    brackets.>

[516]John Pell[AN], S.T.Dr., was the son of John, who was the son of
John.

John Pell, D.D., was the son of John Pell, ...[517] of Southwyck in
Sussex, in which parish he was borne, at ..., on St. David's day (1st
of March) 1610[518], horâ ... (his youngest uncle guessed about noon).

His father was [a divine] but a kind of Non-conformist; of the Pells of
Lincolnshire, an ancient familie; his mother [of the Hollands of Kent].
His father dyed when his son John was but 5 yeares old and six weekes,
and left him an excellent library.

<He> went to schoole at the free-schoole at Stenning, a burrough
towne in Sussex, at the first founding of the schoole; an excellent
schoolmaster, John Jeffreys. At 13 yeares and a quarter old he
went as good a scholar to Cambridge, to Trinity Colledge, as most
Masters of Arts in the University (he understood Latin, Greek, and
Hebrew), so that he played not much (one[519] must imagine) with his
schoolfellowes, for, when they had play-dayes, or after schoole-time,
he spent his time in the library aforesaid.

He [never[520] stood at any election of] fellow[s] or scholar[s of the
House at] Trinity College.

Of person he was very handsome, and of a very strong and excellent
habit of body, melancholic, sanguine, darke browne haire with an
excellent moist curle.

[Before[521] he went first out of England,] he understood[522] these
languages (besides his mother-tongue), viz. Latin, Greek, Hebrue,
Arabique, Italian, French, Spanish, High-Dutch, and Low-Dutch.

Anno Domini 1632 he maried [Ithamara Reginalds, second daughter to Mr.
Henry Reginalds of London. He had by her 4 sonnes and 4 daughters borne
in this order[523] S., D., D., S., D., S., D., S.].

Dr. Pell haz sayd to me that he did believe that he solved some
questions _non sine divino auxilio_.

Anno Domini 1643 he went to Amsterdam, in December; was there Professor
of Mathematiques, next after Martinus Hortensius, about 2 yeares.

1646, the prince of Orange called for him to be publique professor of
Philosophy and Mathematiques at the _Schola Illustris_ at Breda, that
was founded that yeare by his Highnesse; vide the Doctor's inaugurall
oration[524] there, printed--the first thing printed that his name was
to.

He returned into England, 1652.

In 1654 Oliver, Lord Protector, sent him envoyé to the Protestant
cantons of Switzerland; resided chiefly at Zurich. He was sent out with
the title of _ablegatus_, but afterwards he had order to continue there
with the title of _Resident_.

In 1658 he returned into England and so little before the death of
Oliver Cromwell that he never sawe him since he was Protector.

Memorandum--when he tooke his leave from Zurich, June 23, 1658, he made
a Latin speech, which I have seen.

Memorandum that in his negociation he did no disservice to King Charles
IIᵈ, nor to the church, as may appeare by his letters which are in the
Secretarie's Office.

[525]Richard Cromwell, Protector, did not fully pay him for his
business in Piedmont, wherby he was in some want; and so when King
Charles II was restored[526], Dr. Sanderson, bishop of Lincoln,
perswaded him to take Holy Orders. He was not adroit for preaching.

[527]When King Charles II had been at home ten months, Mr. John Pell
first tooke Orders. He was made deacon upon the last of March, 1661,
by bishop Sanderson of Lincoln, by whom he was made priest in June
following.

Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of Lundon, [procured[528] for] him the
parsonage of Fobbing[AO] in Essex, 1661, and two yeares after (1663)
[gave him] the parsonage of Laindon cum annexa capella de Bartelsdon
in eodem comitatu, which benefices are in the infamous and unhealthy
(aguesh[529]) hundreds of Essex.

Mr. Edward Waller on the death of the countesse of Warwick:--

    Curst be alreadie those Essexian plaines
    Where ... Death and Horrour reignes.--
                             etc.

[At Fobbing, seven curates dyed within the first ten yeares]; in
sixteen yeares, _six_ of those that had been his curates at Laindon are
dead; besides those that went away from both places; and the death of
his wife [servants, and grandchildren].

Gilbert Sheldon being made archbishop of Canterbury, 16--[530], John
Pell[XLVI.] was made one of his Cambridge[XLVII.] chapleines; and
complaining one day to his Grace at Lambith of the unhealthinesse of
his benefice as abovesayd, sayd my Lord, 'I doe not intend that you
shall live there.' 'No,' sayd [Doctor] Pell, ('but[531] your grace does
intend that) I shall die there.'

[XLVI.] Quaere, when Doctor[532].

[XLVII.] He haz 2 Oxford chaplaines and 2 Cambridge.

Now by this time (1680), you doubt not but this great, learned man,
famous both at home and abroad, haz obtained some considerable dignity
in[533] the church. You ought not in modestie to ghesse at lesse then
a deanery.--Why, truly, he is stak't to this poor preferment still!
For though the parishes are large, yet (curates, etc., discharged) he
cleares not above 3-score pound per annum (hardly fourscore), and lives
in an obscure[XLVIII.] lodging, three stories high, in Jermyn Street,
next to the signe of the Ship, wanting not only bookes but his proper
MSS. which are many, as by and by will appeare. Many of them are at
Brereton at my lord Brereton's in Cheshire.

[XLVIII.] Ut saepe magna ingenia in occulto latent.--PLAUTUS, _Captivi_.

Memorandum:--... lord Brereton[534] was sent to Breda to recieve the
instruction of this worthy person, by his grandfather (George Goring,
the earle of Norwich) anno 1647, where he stayed ...[535], where he
became a good proficient, especially in algebra to which his genius
most inclined him and which he used to his dyeing day, which was
17 March, 1679/80: lies[536] buried in ...[537] St. Martin's church
in-the-fields. I cannot but mention this noble lord but with a great
deale of passion, for a more vertuous person (besides his great
learning) I never knew. I have had the honour of his acquaintance since
his comeing from Breda into England. Never was there greater love
between master and scholar then between Dr. Pell and this scholar of
his[538], whose death March 17, 1679/80[539] hath deprived this worthy
doctor of an ingeniose companion and a usefull friend.


Scripsit[540].

His[541] table of squares, printed at London, 1672; 8 sheetes fol.

Rhonius's Algebra, in High-Dutch, was (indeed) Dr. Pell's; is
translated into English, halfe.--Rhonius was Dr. Pell's scholar at
Zurich and came to him every Friday night after he (J. Pell) had writt
his post-lettres.

Controversia de vera circuli mensura inter Longomontanum et Pellium,
Amstel. (?) Blaeu, 1651/2.

J. Pellii Idea of[542] Mathematicks printed in English and in Latin at
the same time, 16mo.

Inaugural oration, p. 33[543].

            { Ψαμμίτης, a quarter of a sheet of paper one
  Both MSS. {   side; and also
            { Euclid's[544] Xᵗʰ Element(orum liber) (vide
  infra) which is in Cheshire at my lord Brereton's.

He hath written on the tenth booke of Euclid, which is in Cheshire at
the lord Brereton's, and he hath also done[545] the greatest part of
Diophantus[546], which is there[547]--both unprinted[548].

Also he hath donne[549] the second booke of Euclid in one side of a
large sheet of paper most clearly and ingeniously.

He hath donne most succinctly and clearly Archimedis Ψαμμίτης in one
side of an 8vo paper.

Also he hath demonstrated the proportion of the diameter to the
circumference, and shewes what was the reason why Archimedes did
use these two numbers--he did it at the instance of Sir Charles
Scarborough--one sheet.

☞ In the booke called Branker's Algebra that which is purely Dr. Pell's
beginnes at p. 79 and so continues to FINIS--this I had from his owne
mouth.--Desire Mr. A. Wood to take some paines to enquire for Mr.
Turner, M.A. at Oxon (I thinke of Exon. Coll.), who tooke some paines
about Branker's Algebra.

Dr. Pell haz often sayd to me that when he solves a question he
straines every nerve[550] about him, and that now in his old age it
brings him to a loosenesse.

[551]Dr. J. Pell was the first inventor of that excellent way or method
of the marginall working in algebra.

I have heard him say several times that the _Regula falsi_ was falsly
demonstrated by Mr. William Oughtred (quod N.B.) and that Petiscus hath
donne it right.

See Dr. Pell's letter, printed by Joachim Jungius in his Doxo ... in
4to at Hamborough--Mr. Cluverus haz it.

He could not cringe and sneake for preferment though otherwise no man
more humble nor more communicative. He was cast into King's Bench
prison[552] for debt Sept.[553] 7, 1680.

[554]In March 1682 he was very kindly invited by Daniel Whistler, M.D.,
to live with him at the Physitians College in London, where he was very
kindly entertained. About the middle of June he fell extreme sick of a
cold and removed to a grandchild of his maried to one Mr. Hastings in
St. Margaret's Churchyard, Westminster, neer the tower, who now (1684)
lives in Brownlow Street in Drury Lane, where he was like to have been
burnt in his bed by a candle. Nov. 26, fell into convulsion fitts which
had almost killed him.

[555]Gilbert Sheldon, Lord Bishop of London, gave Dr. Pell the
parsonage of Lanedon[C] cum Basseldon in the Hundreds of Essex (they
call it _kill-priest_[556], sarcastically); and king Charles the Second
gave him the parsonage of Fobing[XLIX.], 4 miles distant. Both are of
the value of two hundred pounds per annum (or so accounted); but the
Doctor was a most shiftless man as to worldly affaires, and his tenants
and relations cousin'd him of the profits and kept him so indigent that
he wanted necessarys, even paper and inke, and he had not 6_d._ in his
purse when he dyed, and was buried by the charity of Dr. Richard Busby
and Dr. <John> Sharp, Rector of St. Giles-in-the-fields and Dean of
Norwich, who ordered[557] his body to lye in a vault[558] belonging to
the Rector (the price[559] is x _li._).

[XLIX.] Vide the booke called _Valor Beneficiorum_.

I could not persuade him to make a will; so his books and MSS. fell by
administratorship to Capt. ... Raven, his son-in-law.

His son (John) is a Justice of Peace in New Yorke[560], and lives well.
He thought to have gonne over to him.

This learned person dyed in St. Giles' parish aforesaid at the
house of Mr. Cothorne the reader in Dyot Street on Saterday December
the twelfth 1685, between 4 and 5 P.M. Dr. Busby, schoolmaster of
Westminster, bought all his bookes and papers of Captain Raven, among
which is the last thing he wrote (which he did at my earnest request)
viz. THE TABLES, which are according to his promise in the last line
of his printed tables of squares and cubes (if desired) and which Sir
Cyrillus Wych (then president of the Royall Society) did license for
the press. There only wants a leafe or two for the explanation of the
use of them, which his death hath prevented. Sir Cyril Wych, only,
knowes the use of them. I doe (imperfectly) remember something of his
discourse of them, viz. whereas some questions are capable of severall
answers, by the help of these tables it might be discovered exactly how
many, and no more, solutions, or answers, might be given.

I desired Mr. Theodore Haake, his old acquaintance, to make some
additions to this[561] short collection of memoires of him, but he haz
donne nothing[562].

He dyed of a broaken heart.

[563]Dr. Whistler[564] invited Dr. Pell to his house in anno ..., which
the Dr. likt and accepted of, loving good cheer and good liquour, which
the other did also; where eating and drinking too much, was the cause
of shortning his daies.

Dr. Pell had a brother a chirurgian and practitioner in physick, who
purchased an estate of the natives of New-York and when he died he
left it to his nephew John Pell, only son of the Doctor. It is a great
estate 8 miles broad and ... miles long (quaere Capt. ... Raven).

He had 3 or 4 daughters.


[565]_This <is> writt by Mr. Theodore Haake._

In the year 1638 I came first to be acquainted with Mr. Pell by Mr. S.
Hartlib's meanes, who having heard of his extraordinarie parts in all
kinde of learning, especially the mathematics, perswaded that the same
might be farre more usefully employed and improoved for the publick
advancement of learning, he never left soliciting and engaging frends
heer to perswade Mr. Pell instead of keeping scool, as he then did
at ... in Sussex, to come up to London, where he soon got into great
esteem among the most learned, both natives and forreigners, with whom
he conversed. But he so minded and followed still the cultivating
of his more abstracting studies, and naturally averse from suing or
stooping much for what he was worthy of, it was a good while before he
obtained any suteable place or settlement.

I recommended him once to my Lord Bishop of Lincoln[566] (quondam
Lord Keeper of England), who became very desirous to see the man,
inviting us of purpose to dine once with his lordship for the freer
discourse of all sorts of literature and experiments, to get a touch
and taste that satisfaction Mr. Pell could give him. Which proved so
pertinent and abundant that my lord put the question to him whether
he would accept of a benefice which he was ready, glad, and willing
to bestow on him for his encouragement. Mr. Pell thankd his lordship,
saying he was not capacitate for that, as being no divine and having
made the mathematics his main studie, for the great publick need and
usefullnesse therof, which he had in a manner devoted himself to
improve and advance to the uttmost of his reach and abilities. Which
answer pleased my lord so well that he replyed, 'Alasse! what a sad
case it is that in this great and opulent kingdome there is no publick
encouragement for the excelling in any profession but that of the law
and divinity.[567]Were I in place as once I was, I would never give
over praying and pressing his majesty till a noble stock and fund might
be raised for so fundamentall, universally usefull, and eminent science
as mathematicks.' And therupon his lordship requested Mr. Pell to
befriend him with his visits as often as he could spare time, promising
him always a very hearty welcome. Yet Mr. Pell who was no courtier came
there no more.

In the mean time he communicated to his friends his excellent _Idea
Matheseos_ in half a sheet of paper, which got him a great deal of
repute, both at home and abroad, but no other special advantage, till
Mr. John Morian, a very learned and expert gentleman, gave me notice
that Hortensius, mathematical professor at Amsterdam, was deceased,
wishing that our friend Mr. Pell might succeed. Sir William Boswell,
his majestie's ambassador in Holland, being here then, I conferred with
him about it, who promised all his assistance; and between them, and by
these two, a call was procured from Amsterdam for Mr. Pell, in 1643:
and in May 1644 I met him settled there on my return out of Denmarke.
Where he was, among others, dearly welcome to Gerardus Joannes Vossius.
And soon after his fame was much augmented by his refuting a large book
of Longomontanus _Quadratura_, which caused the Prince of Orange (Henry
Frederick) being about to erect an Academic at Breda, borrowed[568]
Mr. Pell from the magistrate of Amsterdam, to grace his new Academy
with a man of that fame for a few years. And there being comfortably
stayed, the most learned of the then parliament heer, jealous that
others should enjoy a countryman of their own, they never left offers
and promises till they got him hither to be--they gave out--Professor
Honorarius heer. But the sucesse prov'd soon deficient, and reduced him
to much inconvenience, as having now a charge of a pretty large family,
viz. his wife with 4 or 5 children. And this continued till T. H.[569]
was offerd by Th.[570] to be employed in Swisse and about the E.[571]
collection for Pyemont; who excused himself it and recommended Mr. Pell.

This[572] account of Dr. John Pell I had from my worthy friend Mr.
Theodore Haak, whose handwriting it is.

[573]John Pell, D.D., was borne at Southwick in Sussex on St. David's
day, anno Domini 1611; his youngest uncle ghesses about noon.

Anno 1632 he maried.

1643, went to Amsterdam and was there professor of Mathematiques.

1646, the Prince of Orange called for him to be publique professor at
Breda.

1654, Oliver, Protector, sent him envoyé to the cantons of Switzerland.

1661, Gilbert Sheldon, bishop of London, gave him a scurvy parsonage in
Essex ('kill-priest').

1680, August last, he was arrested and layd in prison.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[AN] Aubrey quotes, as applicable to Pell:--

                   'Ingenium ingens
    Inculto latet hoc sub corpore.

                       Horat. _Sat._ I. iii. 34.'

He gives a derivation of the name 'Pell, i.e. a poole--Sussex.' He
gives also the coat: 'Ermine, on a canton ... a pellicane (but not
feeding her young ones) ... [Pell].'

[AO] Fobbing was a Crown living--net annual value, in 1893, £534:
Laindon-cum-Basildon was in the gift of the see of London--net annual
value, in 1893, £491. The figures suggest that Pell had a good appetite
for preferment, to ask for more.



=William Penn= (1644-1718).


[574]William Penn natus Oct. 14, 1644, horâ 7 mane, Londini.

[575]William Penn[AP], the eldest son of Sir William Penn, knight,
[admirall[576] both of the English navy before the restauration of the
king, and commanded as captain-generall under the D. Y.[577] in 1665
against the Dutch fleet[578]], was borne in London, at Tower hill, the
14[579] day of October 1644. 'Twas upon a Monday he thinkes; but 'twas
about 7 a clock in the morning.

(His father was a very good man, but no Quaker; was very much against
his sonne.)

Went to schoole in London, a private schole on that hill, and his
father kept a tutor in the house: but first he went to school at
Chigwell in Essex.

<He was> mighty lively, but with innocence; and[580] extremely tender
under rebuke; and very early delighted in retirement; much given to
reading and meditating[581] of the scriptures, and at 14 had marked
over the Bible. Oftentimes at 13 and 14 in his meditations ravisht with
joy, and dissolved into teares.

The first sense he had of God was when he was 11 yeares old at
Chigwell, being retired in a chamber alone. He was so suddenly
surprized with an inward comfort and (as he thought) an externall glory
in the roome that he has many times sayd that from thence he had the
seale of divinity and immortality, that there was a God and that the
soule of man was capable of enjoying his divine communications.--His
schoolmaster was not of his perswasion.

To Christ's Church in Oxon anno 1660, anno aetatis 16; stayed there
about two yeares.

Anno 1662, went into France; stayd there two yeares.

Returnd and was entred of Lincoln's Inne.

About the plague, growing entirely solitary, was again diverted.
Was employed by his father in a journey into Ireland to the duke of
Ormond's court: the diversions of which not being able to keepe downe
the stronger motions of his soule to a more religious and retired life,
upon the hearing of one Th<omas> Lowe, a tradesman, of Oxon, at Cork,
1667, was so thoroughly convinced of the simplicity and selfe-deniall
of the way of the people called Quakers that from thence he heartily
espoused that judgment[582] and beliefe.

Since which time he haz passed a life of great variety of
circumstances[583], both with respect to good and evill report, divers
controversies orall and written[L.], severall imprisonments[LI.] (one
in Ireland, one in the Tower, <a> 3ʳᵈ in Newgate).

[L.] Ben Clark the bookseller[584] will give me a catalogue of all his
writings.

[LI.] Quaere annum et diem of his imprisonments and his sicknesses and
dangers.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 34ᵛ.

Travelled into Germany, Upper and Lower, annis 1671 and 1677, where
severall were affected with his way[LII.].

[LII.] Did he gaine any to him in France? Neg.[585]--MS. Aubr. 8, fol.
34ᵛ.

Notwithstanding those many odd adventures of his life, he hath severall
times[586] found favour from his majestie and also the D. Y.[587], with
divers of the nobilitye[588], and men of quality and learning in this
kingdom.

His majestie owing to his father 10,000 _li._, 16--, (which, with
the interest of it, came not to lesse than 20,000 _li._,) did, in
consideration therof, grant to him and his heirs a province in America
which his majesty was pleased to name Pensylvania[AQ], the 4th day of
March 1680/1, to which he is now goeing this next September 1681.

[589]His patent for Transylvania[590] is from the beginning of the
40th degree to 43 degrees in latitude, and 5 degrees in longitude from
Chisapeak-bay.

E. W.[591] <says[592] that there are> 2 or 3 things, e.g. military,
mighty necessary <for the colony>--quaere some proposalls.

He speaks well[593] the Latin and the French tongues, and his owne
with great mastership. He often declares[594] in the assemblies of his
Friends, and that with much eloquence[595] and fervency of spirit--by
which, and his perpetuall attendances on K<ing> and P<rince> for the
reliefe of his Friends, he often exposes his health to hazard.

He was chosen (ballotted) November 9th, nemine contradicente, admitted
Fellow of the Royal Societie, London[596], with much respecte.

[597]August 26, 1682, Saturday. This day about 4 a clock P.M. W. Penne,
esq., went towards Deale to launch for Pensylvania. God send him a
prosperous and safe voyage.

Last Wednesday in August (scil. Aug. 30, 1682) about noon he tooke
shippe at Deale.

He returned into England, October (about the middle[598]) 1684--quaere
diem.

[599]W. Penn, esq., married Gulielma Maria Springet, daughter of Sir
William Springet, of the Springets of the Broyles in Sussex.

She was a _posthuma_ of her father, a young gent. of religion and
courage who dyed at the siege of Arundel. His daughter was his image in
person and qualities, virtuous, generous, wise, humble[600]; generally
beloved for those good qualities and one more[601]--the great cures
she does, having great skill in physic and surgery, which she freely
bestows.

She early espoused the same way[602], about anno 1657. She was a great
fortune to her husband, being worth _de claro_ above 10,000 _li._ Her
fortune, quality, and good humour gave her the importunity of many
suitors of extraordinary condition, e.g. lord Brookes and lord J<ohn>
<Vaughan>, etc.; but valueing the unity of beliefe and the selfe
deniall of her profession above the glories of the world, resisted
their motions till Providence brought a man of equall condicion and
⦻[603] to herself to the syncere embracing of the same fayth, whose
mariage haz been crowned with a continued affection.

[Sir William Penn, knight[604],] his father, was a man of excellent
naturall abilities, not equalled in his time for the knowledge of
navall affayres and instrumentall to the raysing of many families. Bred
his son religiously; and, as the times grew loose, would have had his
sonne of the fashion, and was therfore extreme bitter at his sonne's
retirement. But this lasted not alwayes; for, in the conclusion of his
life, he grew not only kind, but fonde; made him the judge and ruler of
his family; was sorry he had no more to leave him (and yet, in England
and Ireland, he left him 1500 _li._ per annum). But, which is most
remarkeable, he that opposed his sonne's way because of the crosse that
was in it to the world's latitude, did himselfe embrace this faith,
recommending to his son the plainesse and selfe deniall of it, sayeing
'Keep to the plainesse of your way, and you will make an end of the
priests to the ends of the earth.' And so he deceased, desiring that
none but his son William should close his eies (which he did). Obiit
anno aetatis 49, 4 months.

             [605]Pen _m._ ...
                       |
                 ... Penn, of Mynety com.  _m._ Joane Gilbert
                 Wilts (Hale-house in       |   (of the Gilberts
                 Minety). He lies buried    |   of Yorkshire).
                 in Myntie chancell, vide   |
                 the inscription.           |
                                       +----+
                                       |
                                Sir William Penn, _m._ Margaret Jasper,
                                knight.            |   daughter of John
                                                   |   Jaspar, merchant,
                                                   |   of Roterdam.
        +---------------------------+--------------+-------+
        |                           |                      |
  1. W. Penn, _m._ Gulielma   2. Richard,    3. Margaret, _m._ Anthony Lowder
     esq.      |   Maria         obiit sine                |   of Mask in
               |   Springet.     prole.                    |   Cleaveland
               |                                           |   in Yorkshire.
         +-----+----------+------------+             +---+-+-+---+
         |                |            |             |   |   |   |
  1. Springet Pen,  2. William.  3. Laetitia.        1   2   3   4
     eldest son.


[606]_A Catalogue of William Penn's writings._

SHEETS.  NO.

    8.   1.  The guide mistaken, being an answer to J. Clapham, 1668, 4to.

    6.   2.  The sandy foundation shaken, or an answer to
             Vincent, etc., 1668, 4to.

    2.   3.  An apology for the sandy foundation, 1669, 8vo.

    3.   4.  Truth exalted, or a testimony to rulers, preists,
             and bishops, 1669, 4to; addit. <16>71.

   24.   5.  No cross, no crowne[607], 1669, 4to. Reprinting.

   36.   6.  A serious apology for <the> people cal'd
             Quakers; answer to Taylor and Tyms of
             Ireland; 1-1/2 written by G. Whithead, 1669, 4to.

    1.   7.  A letter of love to the young convinc'd, 1669, 4to.

    8.   8.  A seasonable caveat against popery, 1669, 4to.

    8.   9.  The[608] ancient liberties of the people asserted in
             W. P. tryal, 1670, 4to.

    6.  10.  Truth rescued from imposture, being an answer
             to S. Sterling[609], 1670, 4to.

    6.  11.  The great case of liberty of conscience asserted, 1670, 4to.

    4.  12.  New wittnesses proved old hereticks, being an
             answer to Mugleton, 1672, 4to.

   10.  13.  The spirit of truth vindicated, being an answer
             to a Socinian, 1672, 4to.

    2.  14.  Plaine dealing with a traducing Baptist; answer
             to Morse, 1672, 4to.

 1 larg 15.  A winding-sheet for controversy
 sheet.      ended; answer to Morse, 1672, 4to large.

    1.  16.  Propos'd comprehension seriously to be considered,
             1672, broadside.

   18.  17.  Quakerisme, a new nickname for old Christianity,
             answer to Faldo, 1672, 8vo large.

   32.  18.  The invalidity of J. Faldo, being a rejoynder
             in answer to him, 1673, 8vo large.

   12.  19.  Wisdom justified of her children, or an answer
             to Hallywell, 1673, 8vo large.

   16.  20.  Reason against rayling, or an answer to Hicks
             Dialogues, 1673, 8vo large.

   12.  21.  The counterfitt Christian detected, answer to
             Hicks 3d. Dialogue, 1674, 8vo large.

    2.  22.  A briefe returne to J. Faldo's curbe, 1674, 8vo large.

  169.  23.  The Christian Quaker and his divine testimony
             vindicated, 1674, folio.

    2.  24.  Vrim and Thummim or light and righteousness
             vindicated, 1674, 4to.

    4.  25.  A just rebuke[610] to 21 divines that vindicated
             J. Faldo's book, 1674, 4to.

    1.  26.  Christian liberty desired, in a letter to the
             States at Emden, 1674, 4to.

    1.  27.  A solemn offer to the Baptist to vindicate
             truth, 1674, broadside.

    1.  28.  Naked truth needs no shift, being an answer to
             The last shift, 1674, broadside.

    1.  29.  Libels no prooffs, 1674, broadside.

    1.  30.  A returne to Jer. Jues sober request, 1674, broadside.

   24.  31.  A treatise of oathes or not-swearing vindicated,
             1675, 4to.

    6.  32.  England's present interest, with honour to the
             prince, and safty to the people, 1675, 4to.

    2.  33.  Saul smitten to the ground, or Mathew Hide's
             remorse, 1675, 4to.

    5.  34.  The continued cry of the oppressed, or Friends'
             sufferings presented, 1675, 4to.

    1.  35.  Epistola consulibus Emdeni, 1675, 4to.

    6.  36.  The skirmisher defeated or an answer to ... 1676, 4to.

    2.  37.  An epistle to the churches of Jesus, 1677, 4to.

    4.  38.  A briefe answer to a foolish libell, 1678, 4to.

    1.  39.  To the children of light in this generation, 1678, 4to.

    3.  40.  One project more for the good of England, 1679, folio.

    3.  41.  An account of the province of Pensilvania[AQ], 1681, folio.

    1.  42.  An abstract of the province of Pennsilvania, 1681, folio.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[AP] The face of the leaf is frayed, and two notes in the top margin
have become illegible: one said something about 'navy'; the other ended
'anno in Sept. 1670.'

On fol. 34ᵛ of MS. Aubr. 8 Anthony Wood notes 'Will. Pen, the
coryphaeus and pride of the Quakers.' A comparison of this life with
the notice of Penn in the _Athenae Oxonienses_, and of the life of John
Pell with the notice in the _Fasti_, shows how large is Wood's debt to
Aubrey in that work.

[AQ] At MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 37, is found this pamphlet, 'A brief account
of the province of Pennsylvania, lately granted by the king ... to
William Penn,' folio, 8 pages, 'London, printed for Benjamin Clark in
George Yard in Lombard Street, 1681.'




=Sir Thomas Penruddock.=


[611]<It was a> capital <offence> for a native Irishman to come to
Dublin without a passe.

Sir ... espying ... went into the corne ... found him and hung him up
immediately--Mr. Anderson.




=Sir William Petty= (1632-1687).


<_His coat of arms_[612]: MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 12ᵛ.>

Ermine, on a bend gules[LIII.], a <magnetic> needle, pointing to the
Polar Star, or, for _Petty_: impaling, sable three walnut leaves,
between 2 bendlets, or, for _Waller_[613].

[LIII.] I have given this bend of Sir William Petty's coate of armes a
false colouring, scilicet red (but it was my lady's mistake[614]); for
I find in his scutchin at his house at his death it is azure.

The crest is a beehive, or, with bees about it: the motto is

                          _Ut apes Geometria._


<_His horoscope_[615]: MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 12ᵛ>.

Monday, Maii 26to, 1623: 11ʰ 42´ 56˝ P.M., natus Gulielmus Petty,
miles, sub latitudine 51° 10´ (tempus verum), at Rumsey in Hants.

This was donne, and a judgement[616] upon it, by Charles Snell, esq.,
of Alderholt neer Fordingbridge in Hampshire--'Jupiter in Cancer makes
him fatt at heart.' John Gadbury also sayes that vomitts would be
excellent good for him.

[617]Sir William Petty, knight, was the [eldest[618], or only,] son
of ... Petty, of Rumsey in Hampshire, by ... his wife.

His father was borne on the Ashwednsday, before Mr. Hobbes, scil. 1587;
and dyed and was buryed at Rumsey 1644, where Sir William intends to
sett up a monument for him. He was by profession a clothier, and also
did dye his owne cloathes: he left little or no estate to Sir William.

He[619] was borne at his father's house aforesaid, which is ..., on
Monday, the twenty-sixth of May 1623, eleven houres 42´ 56˝ afternoone
(vide Scheme[620]): Xtⁿᵉᵈ on Trinity Sunday.

Rumsey is a little haven towne, but hath most kinds of artificers
in it. When he was a boy his greatest delight was to be looking on
the artificers,--e.g. smyths, the watch-maker, carpenters, joyners,
etc.--and at twelve years old could have worked at any of these
trades. Here he went to schoole, and learn't by 12 yeares a competent
smattering of Latin, and was entred into the Greek. He haz had few
sicknesses. About 8, in April very sick and so continued till towards
Michaelmas. ☞ About 12 (or 13), i.e. before 15, he haz told me,
happened to him the most remarkable _accident of life_ (which he did
not tell me), and which was the foundation of all the rest of his
greatnes and acquiring riches.

He[621] enformed me that, about 15, in March, he went over into
Normandy[622], to Caen, in a vessell that went hence, with a little
stock, and began to merchandize[623], and had so good successe that he
maintained himselfe, and also educated himselfe; this I guesse[624]
was that most remarkable _accident_ that he meant. Here he learn't
the French tongue, and perfected himselfe in the Latin, and had
Greeke enough to serve his turne. Here (at Caen) he studyed the arts.
Memorandum:--he was sometime at La Flesshe in the college of Jesuites.
At 18, he was (I have heard him say) a better mathematician then he is
now: but when occasion is, he knows how to recurre to more mathematical
knowledge. At Paris he studyed anatomie, and read Versalius with Mr.
Thomas Hobbes (vide Mr. Hobbs' life), who loved his company. Mr. H.
then wrot his Optiques; Sir W. P. then had a fine hand in drawing and
limning, and drew Mr. Hobbes's opticall schemes for him, which he was
pleased to like. At Paris, one time, it happened that he was driven to
a great streight for money, and I have heard him say, that he lived a
weeke on two peniworth (or 3, I have forgott which, but I thinke the
former) of walnutts. Quaere whether he was not sometimes a prisoner
there?

Anno Domini 164- he came to Oxon, and entred himselfe of Brasen-nose
college. Here he taught[625] anatomy to the young scholars. Anatomy was
then but little understood by the university, and I remember[626] he
kept a body that he brought by water from Reding a good while to read
on, some way preserv'd or pickled[627].

Anno Domini <1650> happened that memorable accident and experiment of
the reviving Nan Green[628], which is to be ascribed and attributed to
Dr. William Petty, as the first discoverer of life in her, and author
of saving her. Vide and insert the materiall passages in the tryal, and
anatomicall experiment of Nan Green at Oxon: vide the narrative.

Here he lived and was beloved by all the ingeniose scholars[629],
particularly Ralph Bathurst of Trin. Coll. (then Dr. of Physique);
Dr. John Wilkins (Warden of Wadham Coll.); Seth Ward, D.D.,
Astronom. Professor: Dr. <Robert> Wood; Thomas Willis, M.D.,
&c.--Memorandum:--about these times experimentall philosophy first
budded here and was first cultivated by these vertuosi in that darke
time.

Anno Domini ... (quaere) he was chosen musique professor at Gresham
Colledge, London, v. pag.[e] 2.

Anno Domini ... (quaere Edmund Wyld, esq., when) the Parliament sent
surveyors to survey Ireland; vide pag.[630] 2.

[631]Dr. Petty was resident in Oxon 1648, 1649, and left it (if Anthony
Wood[632] is not mistaken) in 1652. He tooke his degree of Dr. of
Physique anno Domini ... at ... (quaere).

He was about 1650 (quaere) elected Professor of Musique at Gresham
Colledge, by, and by the interest of, his friend captaine John Graunt
(who wrote the Observations on the Bills of Mortality), and at that
time was worth but fourtie pounds in all the world.

Shortly after (scil. anno Domini 1652 in August, he had the patent for
Ireland) he was recommended to the Parliament[LIV.] to be one of the
surveyors of Ireland, to which employment capt. John Graunt's interest
did also helpe to give him a lift, and Edmund Wyld, esq., also, then a
member of Parliament, and a great fautor of ingeniose and good men, for
meer meritt sake[LV.] (not being formerly acquainted with him) did him
great service, which perhaps he knowes not of.

[LIV.] Quaere annum.--E. W. esq. respondet 'circiter 1651.'

[LV.] Severall made offers to the Parliament to survey it (when the
Parliament ordered to have it surveyed) for 4000 _li._, 5000 _li._,
6000 _li._; but Sir William (then Dr.) went _lower_ then them all and
gott it. Sir Jonas More contemnd it as dangerous, loving to sleepe in a
whole skin: he was afrayd of the Tories.--From Edmund Wyld, esq. Vide
pag.[633] 2.--MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 13ᵛ.

To be short, he is a person of so great worth and learning, and haz
such a prodigious working witt, that he is both fitt for, and an honour
to, the highest preferment.

By this surveying employment he gott an estate in Ireland (before the
restauration of King Charles II) of 18000 _li._ per annum, the greatest
part wherof he was forced afterwards to refund[634], the former owners
being then declared innocents. He hath yet there 7 or 8000 _li._ per
annum and can, from the Mount Mangorton in the com. of Kerry, behold
50000 acres of his owne land. He hath an estate in every province of
Ireland.

The kingdome of Ireland he hath surveyed, and that with that exactnesse
(quaere Sir J. H. de modo), that there is no estate the<re> to the
value of threscore pounds per annum but he can shew, to the value,
and those that he employed for the geometricall part were ordinary
fellowes, some (perhaps) foot-soldiers, that circumambulated with their
_box and needles_, not knowing what they did, which Sir William knew
right well how to make use of.

Anno Domini 1667 (vide his Scheme[635]), he maried on Trinity
Sunday ... the relict of Sir <Maurice> Fenton, of Ireland, knight,
daughter of Sir Hasdras Waller of Ireland by ..., a very beautifull
and ingeniose lady, browne, with glorious eies, by whom he
hath ... sonnes, and ... daughters, very lovely children, but all like
the mother. He has a naturall daughter that much resembles him, no
legitimate child so much, that acts at the Duke's play-house, who hath
had a child by ... about 1679. She is (1680) about 21.

[636]I remember about 1660 there was a great difference between him
and Sir ... ..., one of Oliver's knights, about.... They printed one
against the other: this knight was wont to preach at Dublin. The knight
had been a soldier, and challenged Sir William to fight with him.
Sir William is extremely short sighted, and being the challengee it
belonged to him to nominate[637] place and weapon. He nominates, for
the place, a darke cellar, and the weapon to be a great carpenter's
axe. This turned the knight's challenge into ridicule, and so it came
to nought.

He can be an excellent droll (if he haz a mind to it) and will preach
extempore incomparably, either the Presbyterian way, Independent,
Cappucin frier, or Jesuite.

[638]He recieved the honour of knighthood Anno Domini....

He had his patent for earle of Kilmore and baron of ... 166- which he
stifles during his life to avoyd envy[LVI.], but his sonne will have
the benefitt of the precedency.--[I expected[639] that his sonne would
have broken-out a lord or earle: ☞ but it seemes that he had enemies at
the court at Dublin, which out of envy obstructed the passing of his
patent.]

[LVI.] Χρυσᾶ ἔπη Pythagorae: Πέφυλαξό γε ταῦτα ποιεῖν ὁπόσα φθόνον ἔχει.

Anno 1660 he came into England, and was presently recieved into good
grace with his majestie, who was mightily pleased with his discourse.

Anno Domini 1663 he made his double-bottom'd vessell (launched about
new-yeere's tide), of which he gave a modell to the Royall Societie
made with his owne hands, and it is kept in the repository at Gresham
College. It did doe very good service, but anno 16--happned to be lost
in an extraordinary storme in the Irish sea. (Memorandum:--there is yet
a double bottomd vessell in the Isle of Wight, made by one Mr. ... ...
which, they say, sailes well: quaere capt. Lee.)

[640]Anno Domini 1675/6 (vide the yeare of T. Deer's lettres), March
18, he was correpted by the Lord Chancellor Finch, when the patent
for the farming of Ireland was sealed, to which Sir William would not
seale. Monday, 20th March, he was affronted by Mr. Vernon: Tuesday
following Sir William and his ladie's brother (Mr. Waller). Hectored
Mr. Vernon and caned him.

[641]He went towards[642] Ireland in order to be a member of that
Parliament, March 22, 1679/80--God send him a prosperous journey.

1680[643] ..., he went to Rumsey to see his native country, and to
erect a monument to his father.

He is a person of an admirable inventive head, and practicall parts. He
hath told me that he hath read but little, that is to say, not since 25
aetat., and is of Mr. Hobbes his mind, that had he read much, as some
men have, he had not known so much as he does, nor should have made
such discoveries and improvements.

I remember one St. Andrewe's day (which is the day of the generall
meeting of the Royall Society for annuall elections), I sayd,
'methought 'twas not so well that we should pitch upon the Patron of
Scotland's day, we should rather have taken St. George or St. Isidore'
(a philosopher canonized). 'No,' said Sir William,' I would rather have
had it[644] on St. Thomas day, for he would not beleeve till he had
seen[645] and putt his fingers into the holes,' according to the motto
_Nullius in verba_.

He haz told me that he never gott by legacies in his life, but only x
_li._ which was not payd.

[646]He has told me, that wheras some men have accidentally come into
the way of preferment, by lying at an inne, and there contracting
an acquaintance; on the roade; or as some others[LVII.] have donne;
he never had any such like opportunity, but hewed out his fortune
himselfe--quod N.B.

[LVII.] E.g. my cosen Rowland Plattes, whom the lord Cottington never
having seen before, liked so well, that he made him his gentleman
of the horse when he went his embassy into Spaine[647]. This was on
ship-board.

He is a proper handsome man, measured six foot high, good head of
browne haire, moderately turning up: vide his picture as Dr. of
Physique. His eies are a kind of goose-grey, but very short sighted,
and, as to aspect, beautifull, and promise sweetnes of nature, and
they doe not decieve, for he is a marveillous good-natured person, and
εὔσπλαγχνος. Eie-browes thick, darke, and straight (horizontall). His
head is very lardge, μακροκέφαλος. He was in his youth very slender,
but since these twenty yeares and more past he grew very plump, so
that now (1680) he is _abdomine tardus_. This last March, 1679/80, I
perswaded him to sitt for his picture to Mr. Loggan, the graver, whom
I forthwith went for myselfe, and he drewe it just before his goeing
into Ireland, and 'tis very like him. But about 1659, he had a picture
in miniture drawne by his friend and mine, Mr. Samuel Cowper (prince of
limners of his age), one of the likest that ever he drew.


_Scripsit:_

1. W. P.'s Advice concerning the Education of Youth[648], sticht, 4to,
printed.

2. [A[649] contest and controversie between him and Sir ...: about
which Sir William printed a little discourse in 8vo: quaere nomen
libri.]

3. Historie or Discourse of Taxes, 4to.

4. Duplicate Proportion, 8vo., printed. [G.[650] 28, p. 5.]

5. Politique Arithmetique, MS. [vide[651] part 3, p. 2a: G. 28, 6.]

6. Politique Anatomie of Ireland, MS.

7. A treatise of building shippes, which he presented to the Royall
Societie about 1661; which the lord Brounker was pleased to keepe to
himselfe, and never returned it; a MS.

_Observations on the Bills of Mortality_[652] were really his.

Translation of ... Psalme in Latin hexameter, stitch't, folio, printed,
London, 1677 (quaere[653]).

Since his death I have seen, in his closet, a great many tractatiuncli
in MS.--e.g. Religio Christiana Puerilis; Via brevis ad Medicinam; An
Essay to know or judge the Value of Landes; His owne life in Latin
verse; De Connubiis; Severall Epigrammes and Verses by him; Of Mills;
An Engine very usefull for raysing of water; _cum multis aliis_ that
have slipt out of my memorie. Memorandum: his 2 last printed tracts
were comparisons or paralleling of London and Paris, stitcht, 8vo.

[654]I have heard Sir William say more than once, that he knew not that
he was purblind till his master[LVIII.] (a master of a shippe) bade
him climbe-up the rope ladder, and give notice when he espied such a
steeple (somewhere upon the coast of England or France, I have forgot
where), which was a land-marke for the avoyding of a shelfe; at last
the master sawe it on the deck, and they fathom'd and found they were
but ... foot water, wherupon (as I remember) his master drubb't him
with a cord.

[LVIII.] He was first bound apprentice to a sea-captaine.

Before he went into Ireland, he sollicited, and no doubt he was an
admirable good sollicitor. I have heard him say that in solliciting
(with the same paines) he could dispatch severall businesses, nay,
better than one alone, for by conversing with severall he should gaine
the more knowledge, and the greater interest.

In the time of the warre with the Dutch, they concluded at the
councell-board at London, to have so many sea men out of Irland (I
thinke 1500). Away to Irland came one with a commission, and acquaints
Sir William with it; sayes Sir William, 'you will never rayse this
number here.' 'Oh,' sayd the other, 'I warrant you, I will not abate
you a man.' Now Sir William knew 'twas impossible, for he knew how many
tunne of shipping belongd to Ireland, and the rule is, to ... tunnes so
many men. Of these shipps halfe were abroad, and of those at home so
many men unfit. In fine, the commissioner with all his diligence could
not possibly rayse above 200 seamen there. So we may see how statesmen
may mistake for want of this Politique Arithmetique.

Another time the councell at Dublin were all in a great racket for
the prohibition of coale from England and Wales, considering that all
about Dublin is such a vast quantity of turfe; so they would improve
their rents, sett poor men on worke, and the city should be served
with fuell cheaper. Sir William _prima facie_ knew that this project
could not succeed. Sayd he, 'If you will make an order to hinder the
bringing-in of coales by foreigne vessells, and bring it in vessells
of your owne, I approve of it very well: but for your supposition of
the cheapnesse of the turfe, 'tis true 'tis cheape on the place, but
consider carriage, consider the yards that must contayn such a quantity
for respective houses, these yards must be rented; what will be the
chardge?' The<y> supputated, and found that (every thing considered)
'twas much dearer then to fetch coale from Wales, or etc.

Memorandum:--about 1665 he presented to the Royall Societie a discourse
of his (in manuscript, of about a quire of paper) of building of
shippes, which the lord Brounker (then president) tooke away, and
still keepes, saying, ''Twas too great an arcanum of state to be
commonly perused'; but Sir William told me that Dr. Robert Wood, M.D.,
aforesayd, has a copie of it, which he himselfe haz not: quaere Dr.
Wood for it.

Sir William Petty died at his house in Peccadilly-street (almost
opposite to St. James church[655],) on Fryday, 16th day of December,
1687, of a gangrene in his foot, occasioned by the swelling of the
gowt, and is buried with his father and mother in the church at Rumsey
in Hampshire. ☞ See his will.

My lady Petty was created baronnesse of Shelburn in Ireland, and her
eldest sonne baron of the same, a little before the comeing-in of the
Prince of Orange.

[656]Sir William Petty had a brother ..., like him, who dyed sine
prole: he has his picture.--Quaere if I have mentioned Nan Green[657]
out of the printed narrative?

[658]His picture by Fuller in his Dr. of M<edicine> gowne, a skull in
his hand; then a spare man; <with a> little band; Veslingius' Anatomie
by him. 'Twas he (Sir William) that putt Fuller to drawe the muscles as
at Oxon gallery[659].

[660]Quaere nomen of the knight his antagonist, Sir ... ...?
Resp.--'Twas Sir Hierome Sanchy that was his antagonist: against whom
he wrote the 8vo booke, about 1662. He was one of Oliver's knights, a
commander and preacher and no conjuror. He challenged Sir William to
fight with him. Sir William being the challengee named the place, a
darke cellar, the weapon, carpenter's great axe; so by this expedient
Sir William (who is short-sighted) would be at an equall tourney with
this douty knight.

[661]Sir W. Petty was a Rota man, and troubled Mr. James Harrington
with his arithmeticall proportions, reducing politie to numbers.

[662]Sir W. P. 18 March <1675/6> correpted by the Lord Chancellor when
the patent was to be sealed, which he would not seale. Monday, 20th,
he was affronted by Mr. Vernon; Tuesday, he hectored him.

[663]Sir William Petty scripsit _A Politicall Anatomie of Ireland_. He
assured me by letter from Dublyn, July 12, 1681:--'I am not forward to
print this Politicall Arithmetique but doe wish that what goeth abroad
were compared with the copie in Sir Robert Southwell's hand, which I
corrected in March 1679.' He told me some yeares since, before the
copie was dedicated to the Royal Societie, that 'the doeing of it would
cost 50,000 _li._, but Ireland will be donne.'

<In MS. Aubr. 22 is a printed tract, 26 pages (besides prefatory
matter), 'The advice of W. P. to Mr. Samuel Hartlib for the advancement
of some particular parts of learning,' Lond. 1648: the preface signed
'W. P., London, 8 Jan. 1647/8,' i.e. W. Petty.>

<In MS. Aubr. 26, at p. 24, are 'Directions from Sir William Petty to
me heretofore, scil. 1671,' for collecting national statistics.>

<In MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 62, are 4 folio printed pages containing the
evidence of Sir William Petty, as sole surviving trustee for 900
soldiers commonly called _the three Regiments_, given on 25 July, 1681,
before Henry Hen, Lord Chief Baron of Ireland, about lands in the
baronies of Iveragh, Dunkeron, and Glanoroght in county Kerry.>

[664]Sir William Pety--his eldest sonne is baron of Shelbrooke in
Ireland; and his lady (widow) is baroness by patent from king James the
2ᵈ, anno 1688.

[665]In the _Paris Gazette_ about January, 1687/8, 'Monsieur Coussin
travaille pour faire éloge de Sir W. Petty which will be inserted in
the _Journal de Scavans_'--which see.

[666]Sir William Petty had a boy that whistled incomparably well. He
after wayted on a lady, a widowe, of good fortune. Every night this boy
was to whistle his lady asleepe. At last shee ... marries him.... This
is certeyn true;--from himselfe and Mrs. Grant[667].




=Fabian Philips= (1601-1690).


[668]Fabian Philips[AR]--from himselfe, 1682--borne hard by Prestbury
in Gloucestershire, anno Domini 1601, in September, on Michelmas-Eve.
His mother's name was Bagehott (an heire to a younger brother); his
father was Andrew Philips, of an ancient familie in Herefordshire,
seaven descents, who sold 600 _li._ per annum in Herefordshire, in
Leominster; some of it his sonne Fabian (of whom I write) bought again.
He was of the Middle Temple, London; a filizer of London, Middlesex,
Cambridgeshire, and Huntingdonshire. Of great assiduity, and reading,
and a great lover of antiquities. He haz a great memorie, which holds
still well now in his 80th yeare. He told me St. Austin wrote at 90;
judge Coke at 84; and bishop Hall, of Norwych, at 8-. His house is over
against the middle of Lincoln's Inne garden, in Chancery Lane. Two
dayes before king Charles 1st was beheaded, he wrote a 'protestation
against the intended murther of the king,' and printed it, and caused
it to be putt upon the posts. When all the courts in Westminster-hall
were voted-downe by Barebones Parliament, he wrote a booke to justifie
the right use of them, and Lenthall (the speaker) and the Keepers of
the Libertie did send him thanks for saveing of the courts.


_Scripsit:_

                                ... ...

                                ... ...

    [669]M.S. Fabiani Philipps, armigeri, Medii Templi socii, qui
    quosdam perfidos et ingratos nimium amando seipsum non (uti
    potuit) amavit, curis librisque consenuit, aliorum totus vix
    suus, tandem per varios vitae vortices et aerumnarum anfractus
    ad amoris et lucis aeternitates coeli sedesque beatissimas
    transmigravit ... die ... aerae Christianae millessimo
    sexcentessimo ... cum ... soles vixisset.

    Qui vero fidus veri Fabianus amator
      Decumbens requiem morte Philippus agit.



<_Catalogue of his writings._>

    [670]1. King Charles the First no man of blood, but a martyr
    for his people.

    2. The antient legall fundamentall and necessary rights of
    courts of justice in their writs of capias arrests and proces
    of outlawry against peremptory summons and citations: printed
    1676.

    3. The reforming registry, against publick registries; printed
    1678.

    4. Reasons for the continuance of the writs of capias and
    proces of arrest against peremptory summons, etc.: printed 1675.

    5. A view of the chancery.

    6. The pretended perspective glasse.

    7. Tuenda non tollenda.

    8. Ligeancia lugens.

    9. The antiquity of fines and amerciaments.

    10. The mistaken recompence.

    11. Restauranda.

    12. Monenda.

    13. Ursa major et minor.

    14. Investigatio jurium et antiquorum et rationalium regni
    etc.: printed 1687.

    15. Legale necessarium: about estreateing and leavying fines
    and amercements and other profits of the king's casuall
    revenues.

    Tristia diffugiunt, paupertas, cura, labores,
      Quae tulit ingratis gratior urna tulit.
    O miseris miserans, Jesus, miserere Philippo;
      Defesso Fabian sanguine parta tuo,
    Sanguine parta tuo, da gaudia luce perenni,
      Gaudia coelicolis morte parata tua.

    Oh ens entium, deus misericordiarum, amator animarum, spes
    viventium et mortuorum, miserere mei et posterorum.

He dyed the 17th of November 1690, and lies buried by his wife at
Twyford, a little church neer Acton in Middlesex, in the southwest part
of the church at the lower end of the church.

His sonne will not be at the chardge to sett this up for his father.
But I have spoken to his good daughter to sett his name and obiit. His
workes will praise him in the gates[671].

--From his eldest sonne, who succeeds him in his place of filazer.

[672]Old Fabian Philips has told me severall times that it hath cost
him 800 _li._ in taking paines searching and writing to assert the
king's prerogative and never gott a groate. Only, when the regulation
of the lawe was, he was made one of the commissioners, which was worth
200 _li._ per annum--I thinke it lasted two yeares.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[AR] Aubrey gives in trick the coat: 'azure, a fess between 3 falcons
argent.' This life is later than the others in MS. Aubr. 6, being
written on a page originally set aside for 'Mr. John Milton.' Letters
of F. Philips to A. Wood are found in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 64, 65.




=John Philips= (1631-1706).


[673]Mr. Philips, author of _Montelion_[674] and _Don Juan
Lamberto_[675], is very happy at jiggish poetrey.

_Montelion_ is happy for a jiggish phancy and gypsies and ballads.




=Katherine Philips= (1631/2-1664).


[676]_Orinda_--From Mr. J. Oxenbridge, her uncle (now prisoner in the
Fleet on her account for a dept of her husband, scil. bound for him 28
yeares since), and lady Montagu.

Mris[677] Katharine Fowler was the daughter of John Fowler of London,
merchant (an eminent merchant in Bucklersbury), and Katherine
Oxenbridge, daughter of ... Oxenbridg, M.D., President of the
Physicians' College--quaere de hoc in <the London> Dispens<atory>.

She was ... christned in Woollchurch. If alive now (July 1681), she
might be 48 or 49; vide register[678].

[679]Katharine, the daughter of John Fowler and Katharine his wife,
was baptized January 11, 1631, as per the register booke of St. Mary
Woole-church appeareth.

  I say,

            Robert Watkins, churchwarden.

[680]She went to schoole at Hackney to Mris Salmon, a famous
schoolmistris, Presbyterian, <John> Ball's catechism[681].
_Amici_[682],--Mris Mary Aubrey and Mris ... Harvey since, lady
(Sir ...) Deering. Loved poetrey at schoole, and made verses there.
She takes after her grandmother Oxenbridge, her grandmother, who was
an acquaintance of Mr. Francis Quarles, being much inclined to poetrie
herselfe.

Maried to James Philips of the Priorie at Cardigan, esq., about 1647
(scil. the yeare after the army was at Putney), by whom she had one
sonne, dead (in her booke), and one daughter married to Mr. Wgan
of ..., in some degree like her mother.

She was very religiously devoted when she was young[683]; prayed by
herself an hower together, and tooke sermons _verbatim_ when she was
but 10 yeares old.

She died of the small pox in Fleet Street. Shee lies buried at St.
Benet-Sherehog at the end of Syth's lane in London.

_Ex registro istius ecclesiae_:--'Mris Katherine Philippes, the wife of
James Philippes, was buried the 23 of June 1664 in the north ayle under
the great stone with the brasen monyment'--the brasse is now lost.

She was when a child much against the bishops, and prayd to God to take
them to him, but afterwards was reconciled to them. Prayed aloud, as
the hypocriticall fashion then was, and was overheared--vide [=a] of
T<homas> H<obbes> Civill Warres and Satyre against Hypocrites.

My cozen Montague <told me that she had a> read pumpled face; wrote
out verses in innes, or mottos in windowes, in her table-booke.

[684]Memorandum:--_La Solitude_ de St. Amant was englished by Mris
Katherine Philips. 'Tis 20 stanzas--I thinke not yet printed--I had
them from Elizabeth, the countesse of Thanet, 1672.

Quaere what shee wrote?

_Poemes._

_Pompey_--tragedy.

She went into Ireland (after her mariage) with the lady Dungannon (whom
she calles _Lucatia_); and at Dublin she wrote Pompey.

Her husband had a good estate, but bought Crowne landes; he mortgaged,
etc. His brother Hector tooke off the mortgages and haz the lands.

From her cosen Blacket, who lived with her from her swadling cloutes
to eight, and taught her to read:--She informes me viz.--when a child
she was mighty apt to learne, and she assures me that she had read the
Bible thorough before she was full four yeares old; she could have
sayd I know not how many places of Scripture and chapters. She was a
frequent hearer of sermons; had an excellent memory and could have
brought away a sermon in her memory. Very good-natured; not at all
high-minded; pretty fatt; not tall; reddish faced.

Quaere my cosen Montagu[685] when she began to make verses.--Quaere how
many children she had.--Quaere her coat of arms, and her husband's.

Major-Generall Skippen[686] was her mother's third husband.

'She[687] lies interred under a gravestone with her father and
grandfather and grandmother, just opposite to the dore of the new
churchyard, about 3 yards distant'--quaere if from the doore or the
opposite wal; and quaere if any inscription on her relations on the
said stone.

She had only one daughter ... who is maried to ... Wgan esq. of
Pembrokeshire or Caermarthenshire--quaere iterum her uncle Oxenbridge.




=Thomas Pigot= (1657-1686).


[688]Mr. Thomas Pigot was borne at Brindle, in Lancashire, about eleven
a clock at night (sed quaere his brother Henry + de hoc)--from Mr. Pond.

[689]I have got Mr. Pigot's birth, as to the month and howre from his
kinswoman who was at his mother's labour and recieved him in her lapp.
If you are acquainted with his brother, desire him to give you the anno
Domini.

[690]Mr. Thomas Pigot, M.A. Coll. Wadh., my worthy friend, obiit August
14, A.D. 1686, of a feaver, about one a clock in the afternoon.

He was fellow of Wadham College and chaplain in ordinary to the
earle of Ossory, at whose house in St. James' Square he deceased. He
was buried in St. James's church by St. James's fields, Sunday the
15th, in the middle aisle between the pulpit and the railes of the
communion-table of the north side of this aisle, in the grave of Mr.
Rigby, the first rector[691] here, upon whose coffin he lies. His head
lies under 14.

His brother haz a MS. of musick written by him, a little 4to.

Quaere for his decyphering the inscription on Sir Thomas More's
family-picture at Bessills-Leigh. Memorandum--this decyphering gives
great light to the antiquitie of the family which els would be lost
utterly.

He haz some pieces of _opus tessellatum_ found at or near Badmanton
(the duke of Beauford's) not long before his death.




=Thomas Pittis= (1636-1687).


[692]Dr. Thomas Pittis, rector of St. Botolph's Bishopsgate, died
Wednesday in Christmas weeke in December 1687. He was buryed in the
Isle of Wight at the west Cowes.

He haz a sonne of the same College[693] in Oxford that he was of.




=Sir William Platers.=


[694]Sir William Plater[695], knight, was a Cambridgeshire gentleman
at.... He had a good estate (about 3000 _li. per annum_). He was a
very well bred gentleman, as most was of those times; had travelled
France, Italie, etc., and understood well those languages. He was one
of the Long Parliament in the time of the late warres.

He was a great admirer and lover of handsome woemen, and kept severall.
Henry Martyn and he were great cronies, but one time (about 1644)
there was some difference between them--Sir William had gott away one
of Henry's girles, and Sir John Berkinhead inserted in his _Mercurius
Aulicus_ how the saintes fell out. He was temperate and thriftie as to
all other things.

He had onely one sonne, who was handsome and ingeniose, and whome he
cultivated with all imaginable care and education[696].... He allowed
his son liberally but enjoyned him still temperance, and to sett downe
his expences[697]....

The father was a good linguist and a good antiquary. This beloved
sonne of his dyeing ..., shortned his father's dayes. He built the
triumphall-like arch wheron the king's armes is in the partition
between church and chancell at St. Margaret's Westminster, under which
he lies buried. The following inscription is on the arch[AS], viz....

[698]Sir William Platers[AT], knight and baronet; about 5000 _li._
per annum. His sonne very ingeniose, and made a very good returne of
his education. He was a colonel in the king's army and was killed in
his service, which his father tooke so to heart that he enjoyed not
himselfe afterwards.

Henry Martyn, his crony, invited him to a treat, where Sir William fell
in love with one of his misses and slockst her away--which Sir J<ohn>
B<irkenhead> putt in the _Mercurius Aulicus_.

In St. Margaret's Westminster he erected a monument against the south
wall for Mr. James Palmer[AU], B.D., sequestred minister of St. Bride's
London. He (Mr Palmer) was a very pious good man, and a benefactor to
his native parish here, where he built an almes-howse; obiit 1659; and
this monument was erected at the sole chardge of Sir William Platers,
knight and baronet--sett downe so there.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[AS] Aubrey notes the inscription in MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 29:--'St.
Margaret's Westminster.

  [Illustration: C.R.]
  Erected at the charge of Sir William
  Platers, Knight and Baronet, anno 1662.'

To which he adds the note:--

'Hee departed this life the 19th of Aprill anno 1668--idem[699], east
side.'

Here Anthony Wood makes the query:--

'Who doe you meane by this person that died 1668?' And Aubrey answers:--

'Sir William Platers. I doe not enter him here as a worthie, but he
does _implere locum_. He was a merry man in the raigne of the Saints.
_Mercurius Aulicus_ made a good sport with him and Henry Martin.'

[AT] Aubrey gives in trick the coat: 'bendy wavy of six argent and
azure'; but leaves blank the coat it impales.

[AU] James Palmer, B.A., of Magd. Coll., Cambr., 1601/2; B.D. 1613;
vicar of St. Bride's, Fleet Street, 1616-45.




=Sir Thomas Pope= (1508-1559).


[700]Sir Thomas Pope, founder of Trinity College, Oxon, bought
church-lands without money. His way was this. He contracted, and then
presently sold long leases, for which he had great fines and but a
small rent. These leases were out in the reigne of King James the
first, and then the estate was worth 8000 pounds per annum. He could
have rode in his owne lands from Cogges (by Witney) to Banbury, about
18 miles.

[701]I have a curious MSS. manuall of Sir Thomas Pope, which if
I thought would be chained in Trinity College library, I would
dedicate it there, but I know not how magistracy, etc., have altered
somebody[702].




=Sir John Popham= (1531-1607).


[703]Sir John Popham[AV], Lord Chiefe Justice of the King's Bench, was
the ... son of ... Popham, of ... in the countie of Somerset.

He was of the Societie of ... and for severall <years> addicted
himselfe but little to the studie of the lawes, but profligate company,
and was wont to tak a purse with them. His wife considered her and his
condition, and at last prevailed with him to lead another life, and to
stick to the studie of the lawe: which, upon her importunity, he did,
being then about thirtie yeares old. <He> spake to his wife to provide
a very good entertainment for his camerades to take his leave of them;
and after that day fell extremely hard to his studie, and profited
exceedingly. He was a strong, stout man, and could endure to sit at it
day and night[LIX.]; became eminent in his calling, had good practise;
called to be a Serjeant <1578>, a Judge <1592>: vide _Origines
Juridiciales_.

[LIX.] The picture of a common law(y)er:--He must have 'an iron head, a
brazen face, and a leaden breech.'

Sir ... (John, I think) Dayrell, of Littlecote, in com. Wilts, having
gott his ladie's waiting woman with child, when her travell came, sent
a servant with a horse for a midwife, whom he was to bring hood-winked.
She was brought, and layd the woman, but as soon as the child was
borne, she sawe the knight take the child and murther it, and burnt
it in the fire in the chamber. She having donne her businesse was
extraordinarily rewarded for her paines, and sent blinfold away.
This horrid action did much run in her mind, and she had a desire to
discover it, but knew not where 'twas. She considerd with herselfe the
time that she was riding, and how many miles might be rode at that rate
in that time, and that it must be some great person's house, for the
roome was 12 foot high; and she could know the chamber if she sawe it.
She went to a Justice of Peace, and search was made. The very chamber
found. The knight was brought to his tryall; and to be short, this
judge had this noble howse, parke, and mannor, and (I thinke) more, for
a bribe to save his life[LX.].

[LX.] Sir John Popham gave sentence according to lawe; but being a
great person and a favourite, he[704] procured a _noli prosequi_.

I have seen his picture; he was a huge, heavie, ugly man. He left a
vast estate to his son, Sir Francis (I thinke ten thousand pounds,
per annum); he lived[705] like a hog, but his sonne John was a great
waster, and dyed in his father's time.

He[706] was the greatest howse-keeper in England; would have at
Littlecote 4 or 5 or more lords at a time. His wife (Harvey) was worth
to him, I thinke, 60000 _li._, and she was as vaine as he, and she sayd
that she had brought such an estate, and she scorned but she would live
as high as he did; and in her husband's absence would have all the
woemen of the countrey thither, and feast them, and make them drunke,
as she would be herselfe. They both dyed by excesse; and by luxury
and cosonage by their servants, when he dyed, there was, I thinke, a
hundred thousand pound debt.

Old Sir Francis, he lived like a hog, at Hownstret in Somerset, all
this while with a moderate pittance.

Mr. John would say that his wive's estate was ill gott, and that was
the reason they prospered no better; she would say that the old judge
gott the estate unjustly, and thus they would twitt one another, and
that with matter of trueth.

I remember this epitaph was made on Mr. John Popham:--

    Here lies he, who, not long since,
    Kept a table like a prince,
    Till Death came, and tooke away.
    Then ask't the old man, What's to pay?

[707]Memorandum:--at the hall in Wellington[AW] in the countie of
Somerset (the ancient seate of the Pophams), and which was this Sir
John's, Lord Chiefe Justice, (but quaere if he did not buy it?) did
hang iron shackells, of which the tradicion of the countrey is that,
long agoe, one of the Pophams (lord of this place) was taken and kept
a slave by the Turkes for a good while, and that by his ladie's great
pietie, and continuall prayers, he was brought to this place by an
invisible power, with these shackells on his legges, which were here
hung up as a memoriall, and continued till the house (being a garrison)
was burn't. All the countrey people steadfastly beleeve the trueth
hereof.

[708]Lord Chief Justice Popham first brought in (i.e. revived) brick
building in London (scil. after Lincolne's Inne and St. James's);
and first sett-afoote the Plantations,--e.g. Virginia (from Fabian
Philips)--which he stockt or planted out of all the gaoles of England.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[AV] Aubrey gives in trick the coat: 'argent, on a chief gules 2 bucks'
heads caboshed or, a crescent for difference.'

[AW] MS. Wood F. 49, fol. 139, has a note which Wood describes to be by
'Francis Snow, of Merton College,' viz. '"Sir John Popham, Lord Chiefe
Justice of England, Privy Councellor of Queen Elizabeth and King James,
aged 76, died 10 of June 1607": at Wellington in Somerset, this cost me
a shilling.' Wood notes that the words are 'on his monument: which is
all written thereon, and therefore print it.'




=Samuel Pordage= (1633-1691?).


[709]Samuel Pordage I knew very well. He was head-steward of the lands
to the right honourable Philip, earl of Pembroke.

His father was called Dr. Pordage, a physitian and astrologer; I know
not whether he was rector. His picture was graved three or four yeares
since, I thinke 'tis before a book.

The son (Samuel), a civil courteous person, and a handsome man; gave me
(1660) his translation of Seneca's _Troas_ in English; and I think he
hath printed something since.




=Francis Potter= (1594-1678).


[710]Mr. Francis Potter's father[711] was one of the benefactors to the
organ at the cathedrall church at Worcester, and there amongst others
is this coate--'..., a chevron between 3 flower-vases ...' [Potter].

[712]Francis Potter, B.D., borne at Mere, a little market-towne in
Wilts, 'upon Trinity-Sunday-eve 1594, in the evening.'--'Anno Domini
1625, December 10ᵗʰ, horâ decimâ, inventum est mysterium Bestiae' as he
went up the staire to his chamber (which was at his brother's, scil.
the great roome that nowe is added to the President's lodgeing).

[713]'A.D. 1625, December 10ᵗʰ, hora decima inventum est Mysterium
Bestiæ'--these words I found wrote in his Greeke Testament. He told
me the notion came into his mind as he was goeing up staires into his
chamber at Trin. Coll. which was the senior fellowe's chamber then (he
lay with his brother, Dr. Hannibal Potter): this chamber is now united
to the President's lodgeings.

[714]Francis Potter, B.D.: Anthony Ettrick adviseth me to write

         'To the worthy successor of Mr. Potter at Kilmington,'

and it will oblige the said rector to speed an answer, and also an
account of the picture of Sir Thomas Pope--No answer! Quaere my brother
Tom who is successor; and quaere and vide register and place of buriall.

[715]Mr. Francis Potter, B.D., was borne at the [vicaridge[716]] house
at Mere in the county of Wiltes, anno Domini [1594, upon Trinity
Sunday eve, in the evening].

His father was minister there, and also of Kilmanton in com. Somerset
about 3 miles distant, and was also a prebendary of the Cathedrall
Church of Worcester. He had three sonnes, Hannibal, Francis, and....
His wife's name was Horsey, of the worshipfull and ancient family of
the Horseys of Clifton in com. Dorset.

He was taught his grammar learnings by Mr. <Henry> Bright (the famous
school master of those times) of the schoole at Worcester.

Anno ætatis <15> (vide A. Wood's _Antiq. Oxon._) he went to Trinity
Colledge in Oxon, where his father (who was an Oxfordshire man borne)
had been a fellowe. His brother Hannibal was his tutor. Here he was a
commoner twenty-seaven yeares, and was senior to all the house but Dr.
Kettle and his brother.

His genius lay most of all to the mechanicks; he had an admirable
mechanicall invention, but in that darke time wanted encouragement,
and when his father dyed (which was about 1637) he succeeded him in
the parsonage of Kilmanton, worth, per annum, about 140_li._ He was
from a boy given to draweing and painting. The founder's (Sir Thomas
Pope's) picture in Trinity Colledge hall is of his copying. He had
excellent notions for the raysing of water; I have heard him say,
that he could rayse the water at Worcester with lesse trouble, i.e.
fewer ..., then there are; and that he had never seen a water-house
engine, but that he could invent[717] a better. Kilmanton is on a high
hill, and the parsonage-well is extraordinary deepe. There is the most
ingeniose and usefull buckett-well, that ever I sawe. Now, whereas some
deepe wells have wheeles for men or doggs to go within them, here is
a wheele of ... foot diameter, with steps (like stayres) to walke on
as if you were goeing up staires, and an ordinary bodye's[718] weight
drawes-up a great bucket, which holdes a barrell, and the two bucketts
are contrived so that their ropes alwaies are perpendicular and
consequently parallell, and so never interfere with one another. Now,
this vast buckett would be to combersome to overturne to power out the
water; and therefore, he contrived a board with lifts about the sides,
like a trough, to slide under the bucket, when 'tis drawne up; and at
the bottom of the buckett is a plug, the weight of the water jogging
upon the sliding trough, the water powres out into the trough, and
from thence runnes into your paile, or other vessell. 'Tis extremely
well worth the seeing. I have[719] taken heretofore a draught of it.
I have heard him say that he would have undertaken to have brought up
the water from the springs at the bottom of the hill to the towne of
Shaftesbury, which is on a waterles hill.

Anno Domini 16<25> (see[720] part ii) goeing into his chamber, the
notion of 25, the roote of 666, for the roote of the number of the
Beast in the Revelation, came into his head; so he opposed 25 to 12,
the roote of 144.

When he tooke his degree of Batchelaur in Divinity, his question was,
An Papa sit Anti-Christus? Aff.--In his younger yeares he was very
apt to fall into a swoune, and so he did when he was disputing in the
Divinity-schoole upon that question.--I remember he told me that one
time reading Aristotle de Natura Animalium, where he describes how
that the lionesses, when great with young, and neer their time of
parturition, doe goe between two trees that growe neer together, and
squeeze out their young ones out of their bellies; he had such a strong
idea of this, and of the paine that the lionesse was in, that he fell
into a swoune.

He was of a very tender constitution, and sickly most of his younger
yeares. His manner was, when he was beginning to be sick, to _breath
strongly_ a good while together, which he sayed did emitt the noxious
vapours.

He was alwayes much contemplative, and had an excellent philosophicall
head. He was no great read man; he had a competent knowledge in the
Latin, Greeke, and Hebrue tongues, but not a critique. Greeke he
learn'd by ... Montanus's Interlineary Testament[721], after he was
a man, without a grammar, and then he read Homer. He understood only
common Arithmetique, and never went farther in Geometrie then the first
six bookes of Euclid; but he had such an inventive head, that with
this foundation he was able to doe great matters in the mechaniques,
and to solve phaenomena in naturall philosophy. He had but few bookes,
which when he dyed were sold for fifty-six shillings, and surely no
great bargaine. He published[722] nothing but his _Interpretation of
the number 666_, in 4to, printed at Oxford, 1642, which haz been twice
translated into Latin, into French, and other languages[AX]. He made
the fine diall with its furniture, on the north wall of the quadrangle
at Trinity Colledge, which he did by Samminitiatus's booke of Dialling
(it haz been gonne about 1670, and another is there putt). He lived and
dyed[723] a batchelour. He was hospitable, vertuous, and temperate;
and, as I sayd before, very contemplative. He lookt the most like a
monk, or one of the pastours of the old time, that I ever sawe one. He
was pretty long visagd and pale cleare skin, gray eie. His discourse
was admirable, and all new and unvulgar. His house was as undeckt[724]
as a monke's cell; yet he had there so many ingeniose inventions that
it was very delightfull. He had a pretty contrived garden there,
where are the finest box hedges of his planting that ever I sawe. The
garden is a good large square; in the middle is a good high mount, all
fortified (as you may say) and adorned with these hedges, which at the
interstices of ... foot have a high pillar (square cutt) of box, that
shewes very stately and lovely both summer and winter.

[Illustration]

On the buttery-dore in his parlour he drew his father's picture at
length, with his booke (fore-shortned), and on the spectacles in his
hand is the reflection of the Gothique south windowe. I mention this
picture the rather, because in processe of time it may be mistaken by
tradition for his son Francis's picture, author of the booke aforesayd.

I never have enjoyed so much pleasure, nor ever so much pleased with
such philosophicall and heartie entertainment as from him. His booke
was in the presse at Oxford, and he there, when I was admitted of the
College, but I had not the honour and happinesse to be acquainted with
him till 1649 (Epiphanie), since which time I had a conjunct friendship
with him to his death, and corresponded frequently with him. I have all
his letters by me, which are very good, and I beleeve neer 200, and
most of them philosophicall.

I have many excellent good notes from him as to mechaniques, etc., and
I never was with him but I learn't, and alwayes tooke notes; but now
indeed the Royall Societie haz out-donne most of his things, as having
a better apparatus, and more spare money. I have a curious designe of
his to drawe a landskip or perspective (1656), but Sir Christopher Wren
hath fallen on the same principle, and the engine is better work't.
He was smyth and joyner enough to serve his turne, but he did not
pretend to curiosity in each. He gave me a quadrant in copper, and made
me another in silver, of his owne projection, which serves for all
latitudes. He shewed me, 1649, the best way of making an arch was a
parabola with a chaine; so he tooke of his girdle from his cassock, and
applyed it to the wall, thus:

[Illustration]

He invented and made with his owne handes a paire of beame[725]
compasses, which will divide an inch into a hundred or a thousand
parts. At one end of the beame[725] is a roundle, which is divided
into 100 equall parts, with a sagitta to turne about it with a handle:
this handle turnes a skrew of a very fine thread, and on the back of
the saile or beame is a graduation. With these compasses he made the
quadrants aforesayd. He gave me a paire of these compasses, which I
shewed to the[726] Royall Societie at their first institution, which
they well liked, and I presented them as a rarity to my honoured
friend, Edmund Wyld, esqre. There are but[727] two of them in the world.

☞ Memorandum that at the Epiphanie, 1649, when I was at his house, he
then told me his notion of curing diseases, etc. by transfusion of
bloud[LXI.] out of one man into another, and that the hint came into
his head reflecting on Ovid's story of Medea and Jason, and that this
was a matter of ten yeares before that time. About a yeare after, he
and I went to trye the experiment, but 'twas on a hen, and the creature
to little and our tooles not good: I then sent him a surgeon's lancet.
Anno ... I recieved a letter from him concerning this subject, which
many yeares since I shewed, and was read and entred in the bookes of
the Royall Societie, for Dr. Lower would have arrogated the invention
to himselfe, and now one [R.[728] Griffith,] Dr. of Physique, of
Richmond, is publishing a booke of the transfusion of bloud, and
desires to insert Mr. Potter's letter: which I here annex in perpetuam
rei memoriam.

[LXI.] Memorandum:--Mr. Meredith Lloyd tells me that Libavius speakes
of the transfusion of bloud, which I dare sweare Mr. F. Potter never
sawe in his life.

  [729]'Worthy Sir,

'I am sorrie that I can as yet give you no better account of that
experiment of which you desire to heare. I am as yet frustrated _in
ipso limine_ (but it is by my owne unexpertnes, who never attempted any
such thing upon any creature before); for I cannot, although I have
tried divers times, strike the veine so as to make him bleed in any
considerable quantity.

'I have prepared a little cleare transparent vessel (like unto a
bladder), made of the[730] craw of a pullet; and I have fastened an
ivory pipe to one of the neckes of it, and I have put it into a veine
which is most conspicuous about the lowest joint of the hinder legges;
and yet I cannot procure above 2 or 3 drops of blood to come into the
pipe or the bladder.

[Illustration]

'I would have sent this bladder and pipe in my letter unto you but that
I feare it might be an occasion that my letter might not come into your
hands.--This is the rude figure of it which I do here set down because
I thinke it the most convenient for this purpose:--

    '_a_ = the necke of the craw which goeth to the mouth.

    '_b_ = the other necke which goeth from the craw to the gissar.
        Another pipe may be tied to this end and put into the veine
        of another living creature at the same time.

    '_d_ = a little crooked ivory pipe, fastened (as a clister pipe
        is) to a bladder.

    '_e_ = the capacity of the craw or bladder.'

  'Sir,

'I received that oyle in a little glasse which you had from Mr. Decreet
and a receipt in another letter, and I desire you not to impute it to
my unthankefulnes that I did not thanke you for it in my last letter. I
have most times such sorrow and discontents in my breast which make me
forget my selfe and my best friends and such things as I most delight
in.

'If I should have occasion to write anything unto you in characters you
may be pleased to remember this key, that the three first letters and
every other three letters doe _quiescere_ and that a comma is placed at
the end of every word. As for example this writing:--

  'Sed cæssat ar, otracci elusus, subest:--
    'that is,
        'cæsar occisus est,

'You need but cancell or make a line under every other three letters,
and then you may easily and speedily read it, as this example:--

'_Sed_ cæs_sat_ ar, o_tra_cci _elu_sus, _sub_est.

'~Sed~ cæs~sat~ ar, o~tra~cci ~elu~sus, ~sub~est.

  'Sir,

'I humbly present my service and best wishes unto you and shall still be

'Yours, in all true affection, to be commanded

                                                FFRANCIS POTTER.

  'Kilmanton,
    Decemb. 7º, 1652.'

<The address (on fol. 62ᵛ) is:--

                    'To the right worshipfull, his
                    'much honoured friend, Mr. John
                     'Aubrey, at the signe of the
                    'Rainebowe, a stationer's shop
                       'In Fleetstreet by Temple
                           'gate, give these
                             'Post-payd.'

The letter has been sealed with numerous seals: e.g. (1) a rose; (2)
'on a cross, 5 pheons; impaling, 2 lions rampant combattant'; (3)
Aesculapius, with his staff, a vase in front of him; (4) a male head,
in profile, with long hair and moustaches; (5) an antique head, with
basket-work cap having a circle of spikes round it.>

[731]Anno Domini 166--he was chosen fellowe of the Royall Societie,
and was there admitted and recieved with much respect.

As he was never a strong man, so in his later times he had his health
best, only about four or five yeares before his death his eie-sight was
bad, and before he dyed quite lost. He dyed ... and is buryed in ... of
the chancell at Kilmanton.

Memorandum: he played at chesse as well as most men. Col. Bishop, his
contemporary at Trinity Coll., is accounted the best of England. I
have heard Mr. Potter say that they two have played at Trin. Coll. (I
thinke 2 daies together) and neither gott the maistery. Memorandum: he
would say that he look't upon the play at chesse <as> very fitt to be
learn't and practised by young men, because it would make them to have
a foresight and be of use to them (by consequence) in their ordering of
humane affaires. Quod N.B.

He haz told me that he had oftentimes dream't that he was at Rome, and
being in fright that he should be seised on and brought before the
pope, did wake with the feare.[LXII.]

[LXII.] Pope ... (against whom Robert Grotest, bishop of Lincolne,
wrote) dreamt that the bishop of Lincolne came to him, and gave him a
great blowe over the face with his staffe: vide Platinam.

'Twas pitty that such a delicate inventive witt should be staked to
a private preferment in an obscure corner (where he wanted ingeniose
conversation), from whence men rarely emerge to higher preferment,
but contract a mosse on them like an old pale in an orchard for want
of ingeniose conversation, which is a great want even to the deepest
thinking men (as Mr. Hobbes haz often sayd to me).

The last time I sawe this honoured friend of mine, Octob. 1674. I had
not seen him in 3 yeares before, and his lippitude then was come even
to blindnesse, which did much grieve me to behold. He had let his beard
be uncutt, which was wont to be but little. I asked him why he did not
get some kinswoman[732] or kinsman of his to live with him, and looke
to him now in his great age? He answer'd me that he had tryed that way,
and found it not so well; for they did begrudge what he spent that
'twas too much and went from them, whereas his servants (strangers)
were kind to him and tooke care of him.

In the troublesome times 'twas his happinesse never to bee sequestred.
He was once maliciously informed against to the Committee at Wells (a
thing very common in those times). When he came before them, one of
them (I have forgot his name) gave him a pint of wine, and gave him
great prayse, and bade him goe home, and feare nothing.

                                  [733]Kilmington, November 8ᵗʰ, 1671.

  Sir,

I recieved your letter but yesterday. I was borne upon Trinitie Sunday
eave; baptized May the 22, 1594, but what day of the moneth Trinity
Sunday was that year[734] I know not.

                                 1671
                                 1594
                                 ----
                                 0077

I heare that bis<hop> Ironsid is lately dead, but where hee was borne
or when he was buried I know not.

I will see those bookes you mention if I can get them.

I have writte no booke called _The Key of Knowledg_, but there is a
booke called _The Key of the Scripture_ written by a London divine,
who is something large upon the Revelation, and preferreth my
interpretation of 666 before all others.

I shalbe very glad to see you here at Kilmington; and rest,

  Your humble servant

                       FRANCIS POTTER.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[AX] Aubrey, in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 199, writing on April 7, 1673,
says: 'Mr. Francis Potter's "666" was translated into Latin by an
Almaigne or a Swisse, whose name I have forgott, and printed, as I
remember, at Basil. Dr. John Pell told me it is in French, and one of
the Dutch languages (but which I have forgott).'




=Hannibal Potter= (1592-1664).


[735]At Oxford (and I doe believe the like at Cambridge) the rod
was frequently used by the tutors and deanes on his pupills, till
bachelaurs of Arts; even gentlemen-commoners. One Dr. I knew (Dr.
Hannibal Potter, Trin. Coll. Oxon) right well that whipt his scholar
with his sword by his side when he came to take his leave of him to goe
to the Innes of Court.




=Vavasor Powell= (1618-1670).


[736]_Life and death of Vavasour Powell_, 1671, p. 106:--Mr. Vavasour
Powell 'was borne of honest and honourable parentage. His father,
Mr. Richard Powell, of a very ancient family in Wales, living in the
burough of Knocklas in Radnorshire, where his ancestors had lived
some 100 yeares before; his mother of the Vavasors, a family of great
antiquity, that came out of Yorkshire into Wales: and so by both
allyed to most of the best families in North Wales. He was brought up
a scholar, and taken by his uncle Mr. Erasmus Powell to be curate at
Clun, where he also kept a schoole.'

Concerning his severall imprisonments, vide pag. 126, etc.

Mrs. Bagshawe haz heard him say that he was at Jesus College, Oxon;
and Mr. Oliver, a minister, did remember it. Vavasor Powell told Mris
Bagshaw of a sermon that he preached when he was of Jesus College.

Vide his _Life_[737] concerning his imprisonments etc.--'Sir J. A.'
there is Sir John Aubrey; and 'Dr. B.' is Dr. Basset, LL.D.; 'C.' is
Caerdif in Glamorganshire.

[738]Vavasour Powell--Mr. Edward Bagshawe, his friend and
fellow-prisoner, edidit[739] scil.:--

'Israel's Salvation, or a collection of the prophecies which concern
the calling of the Jewes and the glory that shall be in the later
dayes,' by E. B.: London, printed for Francis Smith of the Elephant and
Castle without Temple barre, 1671.

He wrote a very good concordance, printed <1671>.




=Sir Robert Poyntz= (1589-1665).


[740]Sir Robert Pointz of Iron-acton in com. Gloc., knight of the Bath,
is the same family with Clifford (as may be seen by the pedegree),
Clifford being called _de Pons_ till he was lord of Clifford Castle in
com. Hereff. adjoyning to Breconshire.

In Henry III they maried with a daughter and heire of Acton, by whom
they had the mannor aforesayd and perhaps other lands.

<Sir Robert was of> Linc. Coll.[741] Vide the rest in tom.[742] iii.

[743]When I was sick of the smallpox at Trinity College[744], Mr. Saul,
who was an old servant of his, told me I thinke that he was of Lincoln
(or, perhaps, that he lay there in the warres).

[745]Sir Robert Poynts, knight of the Bath; his seate was Iron Acton,
in com. Gloc., which came to that family by match of daughter and
heire, tempore Hen. III. Mr. Player, Mr. Anthony Ettrick's son-in-lawe,
who bought this estate, June, 1684, haz all the old evidences, and can
farther enforme me.

But this family and Clifford are the very same, as may be seen by the
pedegre of Clifford, who was _de Pons_ till he gott Clifford-castle, in
com. Hereff. juxta com. Brecon.

This family have had a great estate, and were men of note at Court.

Sir Robert, son of Sir John, Poyntz of whom I now write, and with whom
I had some small acquaintance, was a loyall, sober, and a learned
person. His study, law; chiefly towards the Civill Lawe. Since[746]
the king's restauration he published in print, a pamphlet, about the
bignesse of a good play-booke, entitled, _The Right of Kings_ (or to
that purpose[747]; but to my best remembrance, that is the very title).

As I remember he told me when I was of Trin. Coll. Oxon, 1643, that he
was of Lincoln college. He maried first, Gresill, one of the daughters
and co-heires of ... Gibbons, of ... Kent, by whom he had only two
daughters.

After her decease he had a naturall sonne by Cicely Smyth, who had been
his lady's chamber-mayd, whose name was John, as I remember, who
maried ... daughter of ... Cesar, in com. Hertf. He dyed without issue
about 4 or 5 years since (1684), or lesse. So there is an end of this
ancient family.

Memorandum:--Newark (now the seate of Sir Gabriel Lowe) was built by
Sir Robert's grandfather to keep his whores in. Sir Robert dyed at ...
anno Domini 16-- and buryed....




=William Prynne= (1600-1669).


[748]Memorandum Sir John B<irkenhead> and Mr. Prinne were allwayes
antagonists in the Parliament howse.

William Prinne[AY], esq., was borne (as his nephew George Clarke
assures me[749]: quaere plus de hoc) at Aust in Glocestershire, where
his father had an estate. I find by the Heralds' bookes that he is
descended of an ancient family (vide Bibliothecam Sheldonianam[AZ],
no. 115). His father, and also he, lived at ... wyck[750], a pleasant
seate in Somerset, about 3 miles from Bathe, where his
grand-father, ... Sherston, his mother's father, lived, and had
been mayer, and a very wise magistrate; here[751] he learn't his
grammar-learning. He was of Oriall College in Oxon[BA], where, I
thinke, he tooke the degree of M.A. From hence, anno ... was admitted
of Lincoln's-Inne. He was alwayes temperate and a very hard student,
and he had a prodigious memorie.

Anno <1637> he was stigmatiz'd[LXIII.] in the pillorie, and then
banished to Cornet-castle in <Guern>sey[752], where he was very civilly
treated by the governour ... Carteret, a very ancient familie in that
island. Anno 164<0> he was, with Burton and Bastwyck, called home by
the Parliament, and hundreds mett him and them, out of London, some
miles.

[LXIII.] His eares were not quite cutt off, only the upper part, his
tippes were visible. Bishop William Lawd, A. B. Cant., was much blamed
for being a spectator, when he was his judge: vide Osburne.

He was a learned man, of immense reading, but is much blamed for his
unfaithfull quotations.

His manner of studie was thus: he wore a long quilt cap, which came, 2
or 3, at least, inches, over his eies, which served him as an umbrella
to defend his eies from the light. About every 3 houres his man was to
bring him a roll and a pott of ale[LXIV.] to refocillate his wasted
spirits. So he studied and dranke, and munched some bread: and this
maintained him till night; and then he made a good supper. Now he
did well not to dine, which breakes of one's fancy, which will not
presently be regained: and 'tis with invention as a flux--when once it
is flowing, it runnes amaine; if it is checked, flowes but _guttim_:
and the like for perspiration--check it, and 'tis spoyled.

[LXIV.] Goclenius[753], professor at ... in Germany did better; he
kept bottles of good Rhenish wine in his studie, and, when his spirits
wasted, dranke a good rummer of it.

    Thou that with ale, or viler liquors,
    Didst inspire Wythers, Prinne, and Vicars[LXV.],
    And teach, though it were in despight
    Of nature and the starres, to write,
                              &c.

                                              _Hudibras_: part 1st.

[LXV.] Was one of the assembly and tryers.

He was burghesse of the citie of Bath, before and since the king's
restauration. He was also Keeper of the Records in the Tower of London.

He endured severall imprisonments for the king's cause, and was
(really) very instrumentall in his restauracion.

..., upon the opening of the Parliament, viz. letting in the secluded
members, he girt on his old long rustie sword (longer then ordinary).
Sir William Waller marching behind him (as he went to the Howse), W.
Prynne's long sword ranne between Sir William's short legges, and threw
him downe, which caused laughter.

He was of a strange Saturnine complexion. Sir C. W.[754] sayd once,
that he had the countenance of a witch.

He dyed at his chamber in Lincolne's-Inn, anno ... and is interred
at ... Quaere Ant. Wood <pro> catalogo librorum.

[Illustration]

[755]William Prynne, esq., was buryed under Lincolne's Inne chapell, ut
apparet ex inscriptione et inscripta tabula in capella suspensa, viz.

'Gulielmus Prynne, armiger, de Banco hujus hospitii, obiit 24º die
Octobris, anno Domini 1669, aetatis 69.'


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[AY] Aubrey gives in trick the coat: 'or, a fess engrailed azure,
between 3 escallop shells gules.'

[AZ] i.e. no. 115 of the MSS. in the library of Ralph Sheldon of Beoly:
afterwards bequeathed by Sheldon to the Heralds' College: Clark's
Wood's _Life and Times_, iii. 98, 115.

[BA] Matric. April 24, 1618; B.A. Jan. 22, 1620/1.




=Robert Pugh= (1609-1679).


[756]Captain Pugh, my acquaintance, a writer and a poet. Bred up in
Societate Jesu; but turn'd out because he was a captaine, viz. in the
late warres.

He hath a Latin poem, printed, which will be augmented; and printed a
booke against Dr. <George> Bates' _Elenchus motuum nuperorum_.

He was borne of a good family in ... North Wales (I thinke,
Caernarvonshire).

[757]The native place of captain R. Pugh is spelt thus--Penrhyn.--When
you saw him at Bathe, he wrot this discourse in 8vo, viz.

Bathonensium et Aquisgranensium thermarum comparatio, variis adjunctis
illustrata: R. P.: epistola ad illustrissimum virum, Rogerum,
Castlemaini comitem: Londini: Jo. Martyn, at the Bell in St. Paul's
church-yard, 1676.

He was educated at St. Omar's.

When his studie was searcht, his orders were there found, and also a
lettre from the Queen-mother, whose confessor he had sometimes been,
to the king, that, if he should fall into any danger of the lawe, upon
sight of that lettre he should obtaine his majestie's pardon.

[758]My honoured friend, captain Robert Pugh, dyed in Newgate, on
January 22 <1678/9>, Wednesday night, 12 a clock; and lyes buryed in
Christ Church churchyard on the north side, a yard or two from the
wall, neer about the middle of the length. He writt a booke, which is
almost finished, 'Of the severall states and goverments that have been
here since the troubles,' in the earl of Castlemaine's hands.

All his bookes were seised on; amongst others his almanac, wherin he
entred omnia Caroli II deliramenta[759], which was carryed to the
councell boord: but, as I have sayd, the earl of Castlemain hath gott
the former-mentioned treatise.




=Francis Quarles= (1592-1644).


[760]Francis Quarles, lived at Bath at the Katherine-wheele inne
(opposite to the market-house), and wrote there, a yeare or two.




=William Radford= (1623-1673).


[761]William Radford, my good friend and old acquaintance and fellow
coll<egiate>, ended his dayes at Richmond, where he taught schoole, 14
dayes since. I was with him when he first tooke his bed.

And when I was sick of the small-pox at Trinity College Oxon, he was so
kind as to come to me every day and spend severall houres, or I thinke
melancholy would have spoyled a scurvey antiquary. He was recounting
not many dayes before he dyed your brother Ned's voyage[762] and Mr.
<Thomas> Mariett's to London on foote.

[763]Mris Anne Radford, the widowe of Mr. William Radford, schoolmaster
of Richmond, is now (1673) 33 yeares old. Was borne the 4th of June at
4ʰ P.M. She haz a solar face (yet the sun <in her horoscope> could not
be _in ascendente_), and thrives well, and has a good sound judgment.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

William Radford (of North Weston, Oxon, aged 17) was elected Scholar of
Trinity June 4, 1640, and afterwards Fellow; took M.A. July 4, 1646;
and was ejected from his fellowship by the Parliamentary Visitors in
June, 1648.




=Sir Walter Raleigh= (1552-1618).


[764]Sir Walter Ralegh, knight:--vide Howe's continuation of Stowe's
Chronicle.--Vide Gerard Winstanley's _Worthies of England_, where he
hath 5 or 6 leaves concerning Sir Walter Ralegh.


<_Coat[765] of arms._>

[766]Gules, four fusils conjoined in bend argent.


<_Pedigree._>

         ... Ralegh _m._ (2nd wife) Katherine Champernon _m._ ... Gilbert.
                     |                                    |
                     |                          Adrian Gilbert, chymist,
                     |                          sine prole.
       +-------------+----------------------------------+
       |                                                |
  Sir Carewe _m._ ..., relict            ... _m._ Sir Walter _m._ (2nd) ... ...
  Ralegh,     |   of Sir John    Throckmorton |  Ralegh, 4tus |
  3tius       |   Thynne, of                  |   filius.     |
  filius;     |   Longleate.                  |               |
  obiit 1623, |                       Walter R., killed     Carew R., _m._ ...
  sepultus at |                       in America, sine      of ... in  |
  Downton,    |                       prole; vide History   Surrey.    |
  Wilts.      |                       of the World, by        +--------+
              |                       Sir W. Ralegh,          |
              |                       pag. --.             ... R. _m._ Sir John
              |                                                    |   Elowys.
     +--------+----------------------------+-----------------+    ...
     |                                     |                 |
  Gilbert R. _m._ ... <daughter     Captain George    Walter Raleigh, D.D.,
              |   of> Sir Giles     Ralegh, sine      deane of Wells and rector
              |   Wroughton.        prole.            of Chedzoy in Somerset: a
        +-----+------------------+------------+       millenarie (his tract of
        |                        |            |       that doctrine is lost),
  1. Gilbert, _m._ ...      2. Walter,   3. Thomas,   but he was conformable,
               |   Godard.  sine prole.  sine prole.  and chaplaine to King
               |                                      Charles 1st: vide
          ... _m._ ... Erneley, of Whitehall.         proximam pag.[767]
               |
          ... _m._ ...


<_His marriages and issue._>

[768]He had two wives. His first was <Elizabeth> Throckmorton;
second, ... ..., mother of Carew Ralegh, second[769] son.

[770]Sir John Elwowys maried the daughter and heir of Sir Walter
Ralegh, who was the sonn of Carew Ralegh of ... in Surrey, who was the
second son of Sir Walter Ralegh, the hero. Quaere Sir John Ellowys pro
his skull[771] pro Oxon or Royal Societie.

[772](I[773] cannot yet heare where Sir Edward Shirburne is.) About the
beginning of April I shall satisfy you about Carew Ralegh's daughter--I
doe verily believe 'twas his only child.


<_His brother's family._>

[774]Sir Carew Ralegh, of Downton in com. Wilts, was his eldest[LXVI.]
brother, who was gentleman of the horse to Sir John Thynne of
Longleate, and after his death maryed his lady; by whom he had children
as in the pedigre.

[LXVI.] They (Walter and Tom, his grand-children) say that Sir Carew
was the _elder knight_.

I have heard my grandfather say that Sir Carew had a delicate cleare
voice, and played singularly well on the olpharion[LXVII.] (which was
the instrument in fashion in those dayes), to which he did sing.

[LXVII.] 'Tis as big as a lute, but flatt-bellyed with wire strings.

His grand-children, Walter and Tom (with whom[775] I went to schoole
at Blandford in Dorset 4 yeares) had also excellent tuneable voices,
and playd their parts well on the violl; ingeniose, but all proud and
quarrelsome.


<_At Oxford._>

Sir Walter Ralegh was of ... in Oxford: vide de hoc Anthony Wood's
_Antiquities_.


<_A 'poor' scholar._>

[776]In his youth for severall yeares--quaere Anthony Wood how
long[777]--he was under streights for want of money. I remember that
Mr. Thomas Child of Worcestershire told me that Sir Walter borrowed
a gowne of him when he was at Oxford (they were both of the same
College), which he never restored, nor money for it.

[778]Sir Walter Ralegh was of Oriel College. Mr. Child's father of
Worcestershire was his chamber-fellow, and lent him a gowne, which he
could never gett, nor satisfaction for it.--from Mr. Child.


<_Raleigh in Elizabeth's reign._>

[779]He went into Ireland, where he served in the warres, and shewed
much courage and conduct, but [LXVIII.]he would be perpetually
differing with ... (I thinke, Gray) then Lord Deputy; so that at last
the hearing was to be at <the> councell table before the queen, which
was that he desired; where he told his tale so well and with so good
a grace and presence that the queen tooke especiall notice of him and
presently preferred him. (So that it must be before this that he served
in the French warres.)

[LXVIII.] Quaere + Mr. Justice Ball.

[780]Queen Elizabeth loved to have all the servants of her Court
proper men, and (as beforesaid Sir W. R.'s gracefull presence was
no meane recommendation to him). I thinke his first preferment at
Court was Captaine of her Majestie's guard. There came a countrey
gentleman (or sufficient yeoman) up to towne, who had severall sonns,
but one an extraordinary proper handsome fellowe, whom he did hope
to have preferred to be a yeoman of the guard. The father (a goodly
man himselfe) comes to Sir Walter Raleigh a stranger to him, and told
him that he had brought up a boy that he would desire (having many
children) should be one of her majestie's[781]guard. Quod Sir Walter
Raleigh 'Had you spake for your selfe I should readily have graunted
your desire, for your person deserves it, but I putt in no boyes.'
Said the father, 'Boy, come in.' The son[782] enters, about 18 or 19,
but such a goodly proper young fellow, as Sir Walter Raleigh had not
seen the like--he was the tallest of all the guard. Sir Walter Raleigh
sweares him immediately; and ordered him to carry-up the first dish
at dinner, where the Queen beheld him with admiration[LXIX.], as if a
beautifull young giant had stalked in with the service[783].

[LXIX.] Like Saul, taller by the head and shoulders then other men.

[784]Vide lord Bacon's apothegms and letters. As the queen (Elizabeth)
was playing on the virginalls, ... made this observation, that 'when
_Jack's_ went up, _keys_ went downe,' reflecting on Ralegh.


<_Tobacco._>

[785]He was the first that brought tobacco into England, and into
fashion.--In our part of North Wilts, e.g. Malmesbury hundred, it came
first into fashion by Sir Walter Long.

I have heard my grandfather Lyte say that one pipe was handed from man
to man round about the table. They had first silver pipes; the ordinary
sort made use of a walnutshell and a straw.

It was sold then for it's wayte in silver. I have heard some[LXX.] of
our old yeomen neighbours say that when they went to Malmesbury or
Chippenham market, they culled out their biggest shillings to lay in
the scales against the tobacco.

[LXX.] Josias Tayler.

Sir W. R., standing in a stand at Sir Robert Poyntz' parke at Acton,
tooke a pipe of tobacco, which made the ladies quitt it till he had
donne.

Within these 35 years 'twas scandalous for a divine to take tobacco.

Now, the customes of it are the greatest his majestie hath--

Rider's Almanac (1682, scilicet)--'Since tobacco brought into England
by Sir Walter Raleigh, 99 yeares, the custome whereof is now the
greatest of all others and amounts to yearly ...'

[786]Mr. Michael Weekes of the Royall Societie assures me, out of the
custome-house bookes, that the custome of tobacco over all England is
400,000 _li._ per annum.

[787]Mr. Weekes, register[788] of the Royal Society and an officer of
the custome-house, does assure me that the customes of tobacco over
all England is four hundred thousand pounds per annum.


<_Personal characteristics._>

[789]He was a tall, handsome, and bold man: but his naeve was that he
was damnable proud. Old Sir Robert Harley of Brampton-Brian Castle, who
knew him, would say 'twas a great question who was the proudest, Sir
Walter, or Sir Thomas Overbury, but the difference that was, was judged
on Sir Thomas' side.

[790]His beard turnd up naturally.--I have heard my grandmother say
that when she was young, they were wont to talke of this rebus, viz.,

    The enemie to the stomack[791], and the word of disgrace[792],
    Is the name[793] of the gentleman with a bold face.

[794]Old Sir Thomas Malett, one of the justices of the King's Bench
tempore Caroli I et II, knew Sir Walter; and I have heard him say that,
notwithstanding his so great mastership in style and his conversation
with the learnedst and politest persons, yet he spake broad Devonshire
to his dyeing day. His voice was small, as likewise were my
schoolfellowes', his grandnephewes[795].

[796]Sir Walter Ralegh was a great chymist; and amongst some MSS.
reciepts, I have seen some secrets from him. He studyed most in his
sea-voyages, where he carried always a trunke of bookes along with him,
and had nothing to divert him.

[797]Memorandum:--he made an excellent cordiall, good in feavers, etc.;
Mr. Robert Boyle haz the recipe, and makes it and does great cures by
it.

[798]A person so much immerst in action all along and in fabrication of
his owne fortunes, (till his confinement in the Tower) could have but
little time to study, but what he could spare in the morning. He was no
slug; without doubt, had a wonderfull waking spirit, and great judgment
to guide it.


<_His residences._>

Durham-house was a noble palace; after he came to his greatnes he lived
there, or in some apartment of it. I well remember his study, which
was a little turret that looked into and over the Thames, and had the
prospect which is pleasant perhaps as any in the world, and which not
only refreshes the eie-sight but cheeres the spirits, and (to speake my
mind) I beleeve enlarges an ingeniose man's thoughts.

Shirburne castle, parke, mannor, etc., did belong (and still ought
to belong) to the church of Sarum. 'Twas aliened in ... time (quaere
bishop of Sarum) to ...; then ...; then Sir W. R. begged <it> as a bôn
from queen Elizabeth: where he built a delicate lodge in the park, of
brick, not big, but very convenient for the bignes, a place to retire
from the Court in summer time, and to contemplate, etc. Upon his
attainder, 'twas begged by the favorite Carr, earl of Somerset, who
forfeited it (I thinke) about the poysoning of Sir Thomas Overbury.
Then John, earl of Bristowe, had it given him for his good service in
the ambassade in Spaine, and added two wings to Sir Walter Ralegh's
lodge. In short and indeed 'tis a most sweet and pleasant place and
site as any in the West, perhaps none like it.


<_His acquaintance._>

In his youth his companions were boysterous blades, but generally
those that had witt; except otherwise uppon designe to gett them
engaged for him,--e.g. Sir Charles Snell, of Kington Saint Michael in
North Wilts, my good neighbour, an honest young gentleman but kept a
perpetuall sott, he engaged him to build a ship (the Angel Gabriel) for
the designe for Guiana, which cost him the mannor of Yatton-Keynell,
the farme at Easton-Piers, Thornhill, and the church-lease of Bishops
Cannings; which ship, upon Sir Walter Raleigh's attainder, was
forfeited. No question he had other such young....

From Dr. John Pell:--In his youthfull time, was one Charles Chester,
that often kept company with his acquaintance; he was a bold
impertenent fellowe, and they could never be at quiet for him; a
perpetuall talker, and made a noyse like a drumme in a roome. So one
time at a taverne Sir W. R. beates him and seales up his mouth (i.e.
his upper and neather beard) with hard wax. From him Ben Johnson takes
his Carlo Buffono (i.e. 'jester') in _Every Man out of his Humour_.

[799]He was a second to the earle of Oxford in a duell. Was acquainted
and accepted with all the hero's of our nation in his time.

Sir Walter Long, of Dracot (grandfather to this old Sir James Long)
maried a daughter of Sir John Thynne, by which meanes, and their
consimility of disposition, there was a very conjunct friendship
between the two brothers (Sir Carew and Sir Walter) and him; and old
John Long, who then wayted on Sir W. Long, being one time in the
Privy-Garden with his master, saw the earle of Nottingham wipe the dust
from Sir Walter R.'s shoes with his cloake, in compliment.


<_Portraits of him._>

In the great parlour at Downton, at Mr. Ralegh's, is a good piece (an
originall) of Sir W. in a white sattin doublet, all embrodered with
rich pearles, and a mighty rich chaine of great pearles about his neck,
and the old servants have told me that the pearles were neer as big as
the painted ones.

He had a most remarkeable aspect, an exceeding[800] high forehead,
long-faced, and sour eie-lidded, a kind of pigge-eie.

       *       *       *       *       *

N.B.--At ... an obscure taverne, in Drury-lane (a bayliff's), is a good
picture of this worthy, and also of others of his time; taken upon
some execution (I suppose) formerly.


<_Miscellaneous anecdotes._>

[801]I have heard old major Cosh say that Sir W. Raleigh did not care
to goe on the Thames in a wherry boate: he would rather goe round about
over London bridg.

[802]My old friend James Harrington, esq. [Oceana] was well acquainted
with Sir Benjamin Ruddyer, who was an acquaintance of Sir Walter
Ralegh's. He told Mr. J. H. that Sir Walter Ralegh being invited to
dinner to some great person where his son was to goe with him, he
sayd to his son 'Thou art expected to-day at dinner to goe along with
me, but thou art such a quarrelsome[803], affronting ...[804], that
I am ashamed to have such a beare in my company.' Mr. Walter humbled
himselfe to his father, and promised he would behave himselfe mighty
mannerly. So away they went (and Sir Benjamin, I think, with them). He
sate next to his father and was very demure at least halfe dinner time.
Then sayd he, 'I, this morning, not having the feare of God before my
eies but by the instigation of the devill, went[805]....' Sir Walter
being strangely surprized and putt out of his countenance at so great
a table, gives his son a damned blow over the face. His son, as rude
as he was, would not strike his father, but strikes over the face the
gentleman that sate next to him and sayd 'Box about: 'twill come to my
father anon.' 'Tis now a common-used proverb.

[806]He loved[807] ... one of the mayds of honor[LXXI.].... She proved
with child and I doubt not but this hero tooke care of them both, as
also that the product was more then an ordinary mortall[808].

[LXXI.] Quaere J. Ball, who? 'Twas his first lady.

[809]'Twas Sir Walter Ralegh's epigram on Robert Cecil, earle of
Salisbury, who died in a ditch 3 or 4 miles west from Marleborough,
returning from Bathe to London, which was printed in an 8vo booke about
1656 (perhaps one of Mr. Osborne's):--

    Here lies Robert, our shepherd whilere,
    Who once in a quarter our fleeces did sheer:
    For his oblation to Pan his manner was thus,
    He first gave a trifle, then offred up us.
           *       *       *       *       *
    In spight of the tarbox he dyed of the shabbo.

--This I had from old Sir Thomas Malett, one of the Judges of the
King's Bench, who knew Sir Walter Ralegh, and did remember these
passages.


<_Raleigh in James I's reign._>

[810]I have now forgott (vide History) whether Sir Walter was not for
the putting of Mary, queen of Scotts, to death; I thinke, yea. But,
besides that, at a consultation at Whitehall, after queen Elizabeth's
death, how matters[811] were to be ordered and what ought to be donne,
Sir Walter Raleigh declared his opinion, 'twas the wisest way for
them to keep the government[812] in their owne hands, and sett up a
commonwealth, and not be subject to a needy beggerly nation. It seemes
there were some of this caball[813] who kept not this so secret but
that it came to king James's eare; who at ... (vide _Chronicle_) where
the English noblesse mett and recieved him, being told upon their
presentment to his majesty their names, when Sir Walter Raleigh's name
was told ('Ralegh') said the king 'On my soule, mon, I have heard
_rawly_ of thee.'--He was such a person (every way) that (as King
Charles I sayes of the lord Strafford) a prince would rather be afrayd
of then ashamed of. He had that awfulnes and ascendency in his aspect
over other mortalls, that the king....

It was a most stately sight, the glory of that reception of his
majesty, where the nobility and gentry were in exceeding rich
equippage, having enjoyed a long peace under the most excellent of
queens; and the company[814] was so exceeding numerous that their
obedience[815] carried a secret dread with it. King James did not
inwardly like it, and with an inward envy sayd that, though so and so
(as before), he doubted not but he should have been able on his owne
strength (should the English have kept him out) been able to have
dealt with them, and get his right. [LXXII.]Sayd Sir Walter Raleigh to
him, 'Would to God that had been put to the tryall.' 'Why doe you wish
that?' sayd the king.--'Because,' said Sir Walter, 'that then you would
have knowne your friends from your foes.' But that reason of Sir Walter
was never forgotten nor forgiven.

[LXXII.] From Dr. Whistler.

[816]He was _praefectus_ ( ...[817]) of Jarsey (Caesaria).

[818]Old major[LXXIII.] Stansby of ..., Hants, a most intimate friend
and neighbour and coetanean of the late earle of Southampton (Lord
Treasurer), told me from his friend, the earle, that as to the plott
and businesse (vide _Chronicle_) about the lord Cobham, etc., he being
then governor of Jersey[819], would not fully, or etc., doe things
unles[820] they would goe to his island and there advise and resolve
about it; and that really and indeed Sir Walter's purpose was when he
had them there, to have betrayed them and the plott, and to have then
delivered-up to the king and made his peace.

[LXXIII.] Quaere Sir R. Henley, if not colonel.

As for his noble design in Guiana, vide the printed bookes. Vide a
Latin voyage which John, lord Vaughan, showed me, where is mention of
captaine North (brother to the lord North) who went with Sir Walter,
where is a large account of these matters. Mr. Edmund Wyld knew
him[821] and sayes he was a learned and sober gentleman and good
mathematician, but if you happened to speake of Guiana he would be
strangely passionate and say 'twas 'the blessedst countrey under the
sun,' etc., reflecting on the spoyling that brave designe.

[822]Vide de illo in Capt. North, pag.[823] 18 b.

[824]When he was attached by the officer about the businesse which cost
him his head, he was carryed in a whery[825], I thinke only with two
men. King James was wont to say that he was a coward to be so taken and
conveyed, for els he might easily have made his escape from so slight a
guard.


<_His imprisonment, death, and burial._>

He was prisoner in the Tower ... (quaere) yeares; quaere where his
lodgeings were?

He there (besides his compiling his _History of the World_) studyed
chymistry. The earle of Northumberland was prisoner at the same time,
who was the patrone to Mr. ... Harriot and Mr. Warner, two of the best
mathematicians then in the world, as also Mr. Hues (<who wrote> _de
Globis_). Serjeant Hoskins (the poet) was a prisoner there too.

I heard my cosen Whitney say that he saw him in the Tower. He had a
velvet cap laced, and a rich gowne, and trunke hose.

[826]He was scandalizd with atheisme; but he was a bold man, and would
venture at discourse which was unpleasant to the church-men. I remember
<the> first lord[827] Scudamour sayd ''twas basely sayd of Sir W. R.,
to talke of _the anagramme of Dog_.' In his speech on the scaffold, I
heard my cosen Whitney say (and I thinke 'tis printed) that he spake
not one word of Christ, but of the great and incomprehensible God,
with much zeale and adoration, so that he concluded he was an a-christ,
not an atheist.

He tooke[LXXIV.] a pipe of tobacco a little before he went to the
scaffold, which some formall persons were scandalized at, but I thinke
'twas well and properly donne, to settle his spirits.

[LXXIV.] <recorded by> J. Stowe, I thinke.

I remember I heard old father ... Symonds (è Societate Jesu) say,
that ..., a father, was at his execution[828], and that to his
knowledge he dyed with a lye in his mouth: I have now forgott what
'twas. The time of his execution was contrived to be on my Lord Mayer's
day (viz. the day after St. Simon and Jude) 1618, that the pageants
and fine shewes might drawe away[829] the people from beholding the
tragoedie of one of the gallants worthies that ever England bred.
Buryed privately under the high alter at St. Margaret's church, in
Westminster, on ... (vide Register); in which grave (or neer) lies
James Harrington, esq., author of _Oceana_.

Mr. Elias Ashmole told me that his son Carew Ralegh told him he had his
father's skull; that some yeares since, upon digging-up the grave, his
skull and neck-bone being viewed, they found the bone[830] of his neck
lapped over so, that he could not have been hanged. Quaere Sir John
Elowys for the skull, who married Mr. Carew Ralegh's daughter and heire.

[831]Sir W. Raleigh--Baker's _Chronicle_, p. 441--'A scaffold
was erected in the Old Palace Yard, upon which, after 14 yeares
reprivement, his head was cutt off. At which time such abundance of
bloud issued from his veines that shewed he had stock of nature enough
left to have continued him many yeares in life though now above 3-score
yeares old, if it had not been taken away by the hand of violence.
And this was the end of the great Sir Walter Raleigh, great sometimes
in the favour of queen Elizabeth, and (next to Sir Francis Drake) the
great scourge and hate of the Spaniard; who had many things to be
commended in his life, but none more than his constancy at his death,
which he tooke with so undaunted a resolution that one might percieve
he had a certain expectation of a better life after it, so far he was
from holding those atheisticall opinions, an aspersion whereof some had
cast upon him.'

[832]In the register of St. Margaret's, Westminster, in the moneth of
October, Sir Walter Raleigh is entred, and is the last of that moneth,
but no dayes of the moneth are sett downe, so that he being beheaded on
the Lord Mayer's day, was buryed the.... He was buryed as soon as you
are removed from the top of the steps towards the altar, not under the
altar.--from Elias Ashmole, esq.


_On Sir Walter Rawleigh._

    Here lieth, hidden in this pitt,
    The wonder of the world for witt.
    It to small purpose did him serve;
    His witt could not his life preserve.
    Hee living was belov'd of none,
    Yet in his death all did him moane[LXXV.].
    Heaven hath his soule, the world his fame,
    The grave his corps, Stukley his shame.

[LXXV.] Horat. ep. 1, lib. 2:--Extinctus amabitur _idem_.

This I found among the papers of my honoured friend and neighbour
Thomas Tyndale, esq., obiit ... 167-, aet. 85. This Stukely was....


<_His writings._>

[833]At the end of the _History of the World_ (vide last folio, _Hist.
World_), he laments the death of the most noble and most hopefull
prince Henry,[834] whose great favourite he was, and who, had he
survived his father, would quickly have enlarged him, with rewards of
honour. So upon the prince's death ends his first part of his _History
of the World_, with a gallant eulogie of him, and concludes[835],
_Versa est in luctum cithara mea; et cantus[836] meus in vocem
flentium_.

He had[LXXVI.] an apparatus for the second part, which he, in
discontent, burn't, and sayd, 'If I am not worthy of the world, the
world is not worthy of my workes.'

[LXXVI.] From his grand-nephews my school-fellowes.

[837]His booke sold very slowly at first, and the bookeseller
complayned of it, and told him that he should be a looser by it, which
put Sir W. into a passion; and sayd that since the world did not
understand it, they should not have his second part, which he tooke and
threw into the fire, and burnt before his face.

Mr. Elias Ashmole saies that Degore Whear in his _Praelectiones
Hyemales_ gives him an admirable encomium, and preferres him before all
other historians.

[838]Verses W. R. before Spencer's F. Queen.

[839]He was somtimes a poet, not often[840].--Before Spencer's Faery Q.
is a good copie of verses, which begins thus:--

               Methinkes I see the grave wher Laura lay;

at the bottome W. R.: which, 36 yeares since, I was told were his.


[841]_Scripsit._

A dialogue between a Privy Councellor and a Justice of Peace.

The father's advice to his son.

Historie of the World.

Maximes of State.

History of William the Conqueror--Thomas Gale hath it.

Edmund Wyld, esq., hath his[842] (a manuscript) ☞ 'A tryall of oares
and indications of metalls and mines.'

[843]E<dmund> W<yld>, esq., hath his MSS. of mines and trialls of
mineralls--quod vide.

Vide Mr. Coniers[LXXVII.], apothecary, for Sir Walter Raleigh's
examination (the originall).

[LXXVII.] 'Take a catalogue of the MSS. of Mr. Conyers, apothecary, at
the White Lyon in Fleet Street.'--Memo. in MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6ᵛ.


<_His friends._>

[844]His intimate acquaintance and friends were:--

  ...[845], earle of Oxford.
  Sir Francis Vere.
  Sir Horatio Vere.
  Sir Francis Drake.
  Nicholas Hill.
  <Thomas> Cavendish.
  Mr. Thomas Hariot.
  Sir Walter Long, of Dracot in Wilts.
  Cavaliero Surff,
  etc.
  Ben: Johnson.

When Serjeant Hoskyns was a prisoner in the Tower, he was Sir Walter's
Aristarchus.


<_Copy of a letter by him._>

[846]A copie[LXXVIII.] of Sir W. Ralegh's letter, sent to Mr. Duke, in
Devon, writt with his owne hand.

[LXXVIII.] I thinke I sent the originall to Anthony Wood.

  MR. DUKE,

I wrote to Mr. Prideaux to move you for the purchase of Hayes[LXXIX.],
a farme sometime in my father's possession. I will most willingly give
whatsoever in your conscience you shall deeme it worth, and if at any
time you shall have occasion to use me, you shall find me a thankefull
friend to you and yours. I am resolved, if I cannot entreat you, to
build at Colliton; but for the naturall disposition I have to that
place, being borne in that house, I had rather seate myselfe there
then any where els; I take my leave, readie to countervaile all your
courtesies to the utter of my power.

  _Court, the xxvi
    of July, 1584._

                         Your very willing friend,
                                                In all I shall be able,
                                                  WALTER RALEGH.

[LXXIX.] ☞ Hayes is in the parish of East Budleigh. He was not buryed
at Exeter by his father and mother, nor at Shirburne in Dorset; at
either of which places he desired his wife (in his letter the night
before he dyed) to be interred. His father had 80 yeares in this farme
of Hayes, and wrote 'esquier.'


<_Addenda._>

                          <_His last lines._>

    [847]Even such is tyme, which takes in trust
    Our youth, our joyes, and all we have,
    And payes us but with age and dust.
    Within the darke and silent grave,
    When we have wandered all our wayes,
    Shutts up the story of our dayes.
    But from which grave and earth and dust
    The Lord will rayse me up I trust.

These lines Sir Walter Ralegh wrote in his Bible, the night before he
was beheaded, and desir'd his relations with these words, viz. 'Beg my
dead body, which living is denyed you; and bury it either in Sherburne
or Exeter church.'


<_His burial-place._>

[848]The bishop of Sarum <Seth Ward> saieth that Sir Walter Raleigh
lyes interred in St. Marie's church at Exon, not the cathedral: but
knowes not if any inscription or monument be for him.

[849]<James Harrington> lyes buried in the chancell of St. Margarite's
church at Westminster, the next grave to the illustrious Sir Walter
Raleigh, under the south side of the altar where the priest stands.

Sir Walter Raleigh hath neither stone nor inscription. Mr. Ashmole was
the first told me of Sir Walter Raleigh. His son[850] was buryed since
the king's restauration in his father's grave.


<_MS. account of his trial._>

[851]I am promised the _very originall_ examination of Sir Walter
Ralegh, in the Tower, by Lord Chancellor Bacon, George Abbot
(archbishop of Canterbury), and Sir Edward Coke, under their owne
hands, to insert in my booke.


<_His 'History of the World.'_>

[852]An attorney's father (that did my businesse in Herefordshire,
before I sold it[853]) maryed Dr. <Robert> Burhill's widdowe. She sayd
that he <Burhill> was a great favourite of Sir Walter Ralegh's (and, I
thinke, had been his chaplayne): but all or the greatest part of the
drudgery of his booke, for criticismes, chronology, and reading of
Greeke and Hebrew authors, was performed by him for Sir Walter Ralegh,
whose picture my friend haz as part of the Doctor's goods.




=Walter Raleigh=, son of Sir Walter (1593-1617).


[854]Sir Walter Ralegh's eldest son, Walter, by his first wife, was
killed in America, as you may find in the _Historie of the World_,
which see.

My cosen Whitney[855] was coetanean with this Walter Ralegh at Oxon. I
have now forgot of what house he was of[856]: but I remember he told
me that he was a handsome lusty stout fellow, very bold, and apt to
affront. Spake Latin very fluently; and was a notable disputent and
courser, and would never be out of countenance nor baffeled; fight[857]
lustily; and, one time of coursing, putt a turd in the box, and
besmeared[858] it about his antagonist's face.




=Walter Raleigh=, grandson of Sir Walter (16---1663).


 [859]Sir Walter Ralegh, _m._ ...
                          |
               Carew Ralegh, _m._ ... lady Ashley[860]; but he had a
               of ... in com. |   former wife: but by which wife he had
               Surrey, esq.   |   the issue Mr. Thomas Mariet knowes not.
                              |
                   Sir Walter Raleigh.
                      |
      +---------------+--------+----------------------+
      |                        |                      |
  1. ..., _m._ ... Wilks.  2. ..., _m._ Sir John  3. ..., _m._ John Knight of
                                        Elowys.                Barwick Green
                                                               in Warwickshire.

He was knighted[861] by king Charles II at the same time when Sir
Thomas Overbury was, and some wished that they might both have better
fortunes than the other Sir Walter Ralegh and the other Sir Thomas
Overbury. So you see Sir John Elowys married a daughter and co-heire of
Sir Walter Raleigh.




=... Ralphson= (---- -1683/4).


[862]Mr. ... Ralphson, a nonconformist, was buried in London at ...,
March 14th, 1683/4; above a 1000 persons were at his funerall.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

This note is referred to by Anthony Wood in Clark's Wood's _Life and
Times_, iii. 91. Wood gave Aubrey several commissions to make inquiries
about non-conformists, as is seen in the following notes:--MS. Aubr.
8, fol. 6--'Nonconformists: vide Mr. Collins neer Grub Street and
<Francis> Smyth the bookeseller.' MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 7--'Vide Mr.
Collins a nonconformist in an alley by Grub Street towards Finsbery
at a sadler's; quaere de Anthony Wood's note of nonconformists which
was sent[863] to Thankfull Owen': here Wood adds 'I desire without any
delay to get this paper.'




=Thomas Randolph= (1605-1634/5).


[864]Thomas Randolph, the poet, Cambr.[865]:--I have sent to A. à Wood
his nativity[866] etc., which I had from his brother John, an attorney
(who lives at ...), viz. Thomas Randolph was the eldest son of William
Randolph by his wife Elizabeth Smyth; he was borne at Newnham neer
Daintre in Northamptonshire, June the fifteenth, 1605.

At the age of nine yeares, he wrot the history of our Saviour's
incarnation in English verse, which his brother John haz to shew under
his owne handwriting--never printed, kept as a rarity.

From Mr. Needler:--his haire was of a very light flaxen, almost white
(like J. Scroope's). It was flaggy, as by his picture before his booke
appeares. He was of a pale ill complexion and pock-pitten--from Mr.
Thomas Fludd, his scholefellow at Westminster, who sayes he was of
about my stature or scarce so tall[867].

His father was steward to Sir George Goring in Sussex. He had been very
wild in his youth; and his father (i.e. grandfather to Thomas Randolph)
left him but a groat or 3_d._ in his will, which when he recieved he
nailed to the post of the dore--vide + A. W. lres[868]. His father was
a surveyor of land, i.e. a land measurer.

Anno Domini <1623> he was elected to Trinity College in Cambridge.

Anno ... he rencountred captain Stafford[869] (an ingeniose gent. and
the chiefe of his family, and out of which the great duke of Bucks
brancht) on the roade.... He gave him a pension of I thinke C_ˡⁱ_. per
annum, and he was tutor to his son and heir.

He was very _praecocis ingenii_, and had he lived but a little longer
had been _famae suae superstes_.

He writt (as before mentioned) the history of our Saviour's incarnation
(at 9 yeers old).

Aristippus, and the Joviall Pedler, 2 shewes, quarto, printed at
London by....

Cornelianum dolium, a comoedie in Latin, 8vo, ἀνονυμῶς[870].

The Jealous Lovers, a comedie: printed.

His Poems, with The Muses Looking-glas, and Amyntas, printed at Oxon by
Francis Bowman, 16--, in 4to; after, 16--, by him again in 8vo.

The epitaph on William Laurence in Westminster cloysters[871]--

[Dr. Busby, schoolmaster of Westminster, was Tom Randolph's
schoolfellow and coetanean, and sayth that he made these verses--'tis
his vaine:--

    With diligence and trust[872] most exemplary
    Did William Laurence serve a prebendary[873],
    And[874] for his paines, now past before, not lost,
    Gain'd this remembrance at his master's cost.
    --O read those lines[875] againe: you seldome[876] find
    A servant faithfull and a master kind.
    Short-hand[877] he wrote; his flowre in youth did fade:
    And hasty death short hand of him hath made.
    Well couth he numbers and well[878] measur'd land,
    Thus doth he now that ground wheron you stand
    Wherein he lies; so geometricall
    Art maketh some, but thus will nature all.

                          Obiit Dec. 28, 1621,
                           aetatis suae 29.]

He dyed in the twenty-eighth yeare of his age at Mr. <William>
Stafford's, Blatherwyck, aforesayd; was there buryed March 17, 1634,
in the aisle of that church among that noble family.

Sir Christopher, lord Hatton, erected to his memorie a monument of
white marble--quaere his epitaph; I thinke A<nthony> W<ood> haz it.

I sent to A. Wood his brother's letter to me from whence I had most of
this, and also his epitaph which my lord Hatton gott Mr. H.[879] rector
of Hadham in Essex[880] to make, but it is puerile.




=Eleanor Ratcliffe=, Countess of Sussex (16---1666).


[881]Countesse of Sussex[882]: a great and sad example of the power of
lust and slavery of it. She was as great a bea<u>tie as any in England
and had a good witt. After her lord's death (he was jealous) she sends
for ... (formerly) her footman, and makes him groom of the chamber. He
had the pox and shee knew it; a damnable sot. He waz not very handsom,
but his body of an exquisit shape (_hinc sagittae_). His nostrills
were stufft and borne out with corkes in which were quills to breath
through. About 1666 this countess dyed of the pox.




=Robert Record= (1510?-1558).


[883]Robert Record, M.D.--his life is in lib. 2, p. 174 of[884]
_Historia et Antiquitates Universitatis Oxon._, among the writers of
All Soules College[885].

He was the first that wrote a good arithmetical treatise in English,
which hath been printed a great many times, viz. his 'Arithmetick,
containing the ground of arts in which is taught the general parts
rules and operations of the same in whole numbers and fractions after
a more easie and exact methode then ever heretofore, first written by
Robert Record, Dr. in Phisick,' printed....

It was dedicated 'to the most mighty prince Edward the 6th by the grace
of God king of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc.' In the end
of which epistle:--

'how some of these statutes may be applied to use as well in our time
as in any other time I have particularly declared in this book and some
other I have omitted for just considerations till I may offer them
first unto your majestie to weigh them as to your highness shall seem
good. For many things in them are not to be published without your
highness knowledge and approbation, namely because in them is declared
all the rates of all oyles, for all standards from an ounce upwards,
with other mysteries of mint-matters, and also most part of the
varieties of coines that have been current in this realme by the space
of 600 yeares last past, and many of them were currant in the time
that the Romans ruled here. All which with the ancient description of
England and Ireland, and my simple censure of the same, I have almost
compleated to be exhibited to your highnesse.'--

Quaere if ever published?

'To the reader:--It shall induce me to set forth those further
instructions concerning geometric and cosmography which I have already
promised and am sure hath not hitherto in our English tongue been
published.'--

Quaere of these.

The Whetstone of Witt, which is the second part of Arithmetick,
containing the extraction of rootes, the cossicke practice, with the
rule of equation and the workes of surd nombers. Quarto; dedicated
'to the right worshipfull the governors, consulles, and the rest
of the company of venturers into Muscovia.' Here he speakes:--'For
your commodities I will shortly set forthe suche a book of
navigation'--quaere de hoc libro--'as I dare saie shall partly satisfy
and contente not onely your expectation but also the desire of a great
nomber beside. Wherein I will not forget specialy to touche bothe the
old attempte for the northerly navigations and the late good adventure
with the fortunate successe in discovering that voyage which no man
before you durst attempt sith the time of king Alfred his reigne, I
meane by the space of 700 yere, nother ever any before that time had
passed that voiage except onely Ohthere that dwelt in Halgolande who
reported that jorney to the noble king Alurede, as it doeth yet remain
in auncient recorde of the old Saxon tongue.--In that book also I
will show certain meanes how without great difficultie you may saile
to the North-east Indies and so to Camul Chinchital and Balor which
be countries of great commodities; as for Chatai lieth so far within
the land toward the South Indian seas that the journey is not to be
attempted untill you be better acquainted with those countries that you
must first arrive at.--At London the xii day of November 1557.'

Preface:--'by occasion of trouble upon trouble I was hindered from
accomplishing this work as I did intend.'

In the last leafe of this booke he is frighted by the hasty knocking of
a messenger at the dore and sayes--'then is there no remedie but that I
must neglect all studies and teaching for to withstand these dangers.
My fortune is not so good to have quiet time to teache.'

The Castle of Knowledge, printed at London, 1596, quarto[886], and is
dedicated 'to the most mightie and most puissant princesse, Marie, by
the grace of God, Queen of England, Spaine, both Sicilies, France,
Jerusalem, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Archduchesse of Austria,
Duchesse of Milaine, Burgundie, and Brabant, Countesse of Haspurge,
Flanders, Tyroll, etc.'

He was the first that ever writ of astronomie in the English tongue.

In an admonition for orderly studying of the author's workes before
this booke there is an intimation in verse that he wrote these five
bookes, scilicet, (1) The Ground of Arts, (2) the Pathway to Knowledge,
(3) the Gate of Knowledge, (4) the Castle of Knowledge, (5) the
Treasury of Knowledge.

All that I have seen of his are written in dialogues between the master
and scholar.

[887]Can you[888] enforme me where Dr. Record lies buried? Me thinks
Mr. Stow should mention him.




=John David Rhees= (1534-1609).


[889]Johannes David Rhesus, M.D.:--he wrote a compendium of Aristotle's
Metaphysiques in the British language, mentioned in his epistle to Sir
<Edward> Stradling before his Welsh Grammar. 'Twas in Jesus College
library, Oxon, and my cosen Henry Vaughan (_Olor Iscanus_) had it in
his custody. Dr. Rhees averres[890] there that the British language is
as copious in expressing congruous termes of art as the Greeke or any
language whatsoever. I have sent to Henry Vaughan for it.

[891]I have not yet heard from my cosen Henry Vaughan ('Olor Iscanus')
concerning your queres[892] of Dr. David Rhese the physitian, which I
wonder at.




=John Rider= (1562-1632).


[893]Memorandum--Rider is a Berks family, portant 'party per chevron
argent and sable 3 crescents counter-chang'd.' Quaere if bishop <John>
Rider, the author of the Dictionary, was a Berkshire man.




=George Ripley= (14-- -1490?).


[894]George Ripley was a canon of Burlington, the greatest chymist of
his time. Mr. Elias Ashmole has the draught of his monument there.

Mr. Meredith Lloyd (an able chymist, and who informed his majestie and
Sir Robert Moray herin) hath a MS. in 8vo, 3 inches thick, transcribed
by T. P. 1580, viz.:--Medulla Philosophiae, in English; item,
Ripley's XII Gates, in English verse (more full then in Mr. Ashmole's
_Theatrum Chymicum_)--'Geo. Ripley finivit opus, anno 1471'--with the
astronomicall tables comprehending the secret of the booke.

Item, Mr. Meredith Lloyd haz here in this collection another MSS. of
Chymistry ἀνονυμῶς.

Item, another MS. of Birford, a monk of Ford.

Item, The Mirror of Light[895], another MS.

Item, another of an ἀνόνυμος[896], on the same subject.

The Ordinall of Alchymy, by Norton, MS.

Item, de Mercurio et lapide philosophorum, MS.

In this volumne is also bound-up Ripley's Ars chymica quod sit licita
recte exercentibus.

Item, Mercurii Trismagisti 7 tractat.

Item, ejusdem, Tabulae Smaragdinae.

Studium concilii conjugii de massa Solis et Lunae, impress.
Argentorati, 1566.

I have not had leisure to peruse this rare treasure enough[897]; but
I remember Ripley trounces the monkes of Westminster for cheating the
citizens of London, promising them making of gold.




=... Robartes.=


[898]_Concerning Furzecutters._--Brianston by Blandford in Dorset was,
tempore Henr. 8, belonging to (Sir John, I thinke) Rocklington. He had
a faire estate, and no child; and there was a poor cottager whose name
was Rogers that had a pretty wife whom this knight did visit and had a
mind to have a child by her. As he did suppose, he afterwards had; and
in consideration of affection, etc., settled his whole estate on this
young Rogers. William, lord marquesse Hartford (duke of Somerset), was
son of the grand-daughter of this Rogers.

This present lord Roberts of Truro (now earl of Radnor) his
grandfather (or great-grandfather) was a furze-cutter at ... in
Cornwall--which I have heard old parson Wodenot of Linkenhorne in
Cornwall say many times.




=... Robson.=


[899]Mr. <Fabian> Philips also[900] tells me that ... Robson was the
first that brought into England the art of making Venice glasses, but
Sir Edward Zouche (a courtier and drolling favourite of King James)
oppressed this poor man Robson, and forc't it from him, by these 4
verses to King James, which made his majestie laugh so that he was
ready to bes-- his briggs. The verses are these:--

    Severn, Humber, Trent, and Thames,
    And thy great Ocean and her streames
    Must putt downe Robson and his fires
    Or downe goes Zouche and his desires.

The king granted this ingeniose manufacture to Zouch, being tickled
as aforesayd with these rythmes; and so poor Robson was oppressed and
utterly undon, and came to that low degree of poverty that Mr. Philips
told me that he swept the yard at Whitehall and that he himselfe sawe
him doe it.

Sir Robert Mansell had the glasse-worke afterwards, and employed Mr.
James Howell (author of _The Vocall Forest_) at Venice as a factor to
furnish him with materialls for his worke.




=Henry Rolle= (1589-1656).


[901]I remember, about 1646 (or 1647) that Mr. John Maynard (now
Sir John, and serjeant), came into Middle Temple hall, from
Westminster-hall, weary with business, and hungry, when we had newly
dined. He sate downe by Mr. Bennet Hoskyns (the only son of serjeant
Hoskyns the poet), since baronet, and some others; who having made an
end of their commons, fell unto various discourse, and what was the
meaning of the text (Rom. 5. 7) 'For a just man one would dare to die;
but for a good man one would willingly die.' They askt Mr. Maynard what
was the difference between a just man and a good man. He was beginning
to eate, and cryd:--'Hoh! you have eaten your dinners, and now have
leasure to discourse; I have not.' He had eate but a bitt or two when
he reply'd:--'I'le tell you the difference presently: serjeant Rolle is
_a just man_, and Matthew Hale is _a good man_'; and so fell to make an
end of his dinner. And there could not be a better[902] interpretation
of this text. For serjeant Rolle was just, but by nature penurious;
and his wife made him worse: Matthew Hale was not only just, but
wonderfully charitable and open handed, and did not sound a trumpet
neither, as the hypocrites doe.




=Laurence Rooke= (1623-1662).


[903]Laurence Rooke, borne at ... in Kent, was of <King's> Colledge in
Cambridge, a good mathematician and a very good man, an intimate friend
of Dr. Seth Ward (now lord bishop of Sarum).

I heard him reade at Gresham College on the sixth chapter of _Clavis
Mathematica_, an excellent lecture: quaere for his papers which the
bishop of Sarum haz.

He was a temperate man and of strong constitution, but tooke his
sicknesse of which he dyed by setting up often for astronomicall
observations. He lyes buried in the church of St. Bennet Finke in
London, neer the Old Exchange.

His deare friend the bishop (then of Exon) gave to the Royall Societie
a very faire pendulum clock, dedicated to Mr. Rooke's memory, with this
inscription[904]:--

                Societati Regali ad scientiam naturalem
                        promovendam institutae
                              dono dedit
            Reverendus in Christo pater, Sethus, episcopus
                   Exon, ejusdem societatis sodalis
                              in memoriam
                            Laurentii Rook
               viri omni literarum genere instructissimi
              in Collegio Greshamensi primum Astronomiae
                     deinde Geometriae professoris
                  dictaeque societatis nuper sodalis,
                       qui obiit Jun. 26, 1662.

Seth <Ward>, now lord bishop of Salisbury, hath all Mr. Rooke's papers:
quod N.B.

        [905]M.S.

    Hic subtus sive dormit sive contemplatur
      Qui jamdudum animo metitus est
      Quicquid aut vita aut mors habet
    V.C. Laurentius Rooke e Cantio oriundus
        In Collegio Greshamensi
    Astronomiae primo, dein Geometriae professor,
      Utriusque ornamentum et spes maxima,
    Quem altissima indoles, artesque omnifariae,
      Mores pellucidi, et ad amussim probi,
      Consuetudo facilis et accommoda,
    Bonis doctisque omnibus fecere commendatissimum:
        Vir totus teres et sui plenus
    Cui virtus et pietas et summa ratio
    Desideria metusque omnes sub pedibus dabant.
    Ne se penitus saeculo subducere mortuus possit
      Qui iniquissima modestia vixerat
        Sethus Ward episcopus Exon
        Sodalis et symmystae desideratissimi
          Longas suavesque amicitias
            Hoc saxo prosecutus est.

    Obiit Junii XXVII, A.D. MDCLXII, aetat. XL.
                                     M.S.

This inscription was never set up; made, I thinke, by Ralph Bathurst;
quaere Mr. Abraham Hill.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

In MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 117, attached to the notice of William Camden,
are pp. 17-24 of Lewis du Moulin's Latin orations, 1652. On p. 18 of
this, Aubrey writes: 'I found this fragment amongst the papers of Mr.
Laurence Rooke in bishop Seth Ward's study after his death.' Page 19
begins: 'Oratio in laudem ... Cambdeni,' July 10, 1652, beginning: 'Cum
muneris ratio postulet.'




=Walter Rumsey= (1584-1660).


[906]Judge Rumsey: vide A. Wood's _Antiq. Oxon._

Walter Rumsey, of Lanover, in com. Monmouth, esquier (borne there),
was of <Gloucester Hall> in Oxon; afterwards of the society of Graye's
Inne, where he was a bencher.

He was one of the judges in South Wales, viz. Caermarthen,
Pembrokeshire, and Cardigan circuit. He was so excellent a lawyer, that
he was called _The Picklock of the Lawe_.

He was an ingeniose man, and had a philosophicall head; he was most
curious for graffing, inoculating, and planting, and ponds. If he
had any old dead plumbe-tree, or apple-tree, he lett them stand, and
planted vines at the bottome, and lett them climbe up, and they would
beare very well.

He was one of my councell in my law-suites in Breconshire about the
entaile. He had a kindnesse for me and invited me to his house, and
told me a great many fine things, both naturall and antiquarian.

He was very facetious, and a good musitian, playd on the organ and
lute. He could compose.

He was much troubled with flegme, and being so one winter at the
court at Ludlowe (where he was one of the councesellours), sitting by
the fire, spitting and spawling, he tooke a fine tender sprig, and
tied[907] a ragge at the end, and conceited he might putt it downe his
throate, and fetch-up the flegme, and he did so. Afterwards he made
this instrument of whale-bone. I have oftentimes seen him use it. I
could never make it goe downe my throat, but for those that can 'tis
a most incomparable engine. If troubled with the wind it cures you
_immediately_. It makes you vomit without any paine, and besides, the
vomits of apothecaries have _aliquid veneni_ in them. He wrote a little
8vo booke, of this way of medicine, called _Organon Salutis_: London,
printed for Daniel Pakeman, at the Rainebowe, in Fleet-street, 1659,
scil. the second edition, dedicated to Henry <Pierrepont>, marquess of
Dorchester. I had a young fellow (Marc Collins), that was my servant,
that used it incomparably, more easily than the Judge; he made of them.
In Wilts, among my things, are some of his making still. The Judge sayd
he never sawe any one use it so dextrously in his life. It is no paine,
when downe your throate; he would touch the bottome of his stomach with
it. There is praefixt a letter from the Judge to Sir Henry Blount,
knight; to which is annexed Sir Henry Blount's ingeniose answer.




=John Rushworth= (1607-1690).


[908]I was borne in Northumberland[909], but my parents were both born
in the county of York. The title of the books I writ went by the name
of _Historicall Collections_; except _The earle of Strafford's triall_,
which I toke with my owne pen in characters at the time of his triall,
which I have impartially published in folio. And I gave the first
president of my method in writing and declaring onely matter of fact
in order of time, without observation or reflection: but Dr. Nalson, a
learned man, finds fault with me, but I leave it to posterity to judg.

I being neere of kin to Sir Thomas Fairfax, the parlament's generall,
he made choice of me to be his secretary in the wars[910], by which
means I am beter inabled to give account of military affairs, both in
the first wars and in the second which hapened in the year 1648--all
which I am now upon perfeting the same, but the times favors not the
comeing of it forth.

There is an other thing which inables me the better to proceed with the
work I am now upon, my privity to all debates and passages in the house
of Commons: for that house made choice of me to be assistant at the
table to Mr. Ellsing, clark of that parlament to the house of Commons,
by which means I was privey to all circumstances in there procedings.

I might perticularly remonstrate more concernements of my owne, as
being with the king Charles the first at the camp at Barwick, at the
great councill at York, at Newborne[911] nere Newcastle upon the Scots
invading of England, et cetera.

Both the houses of parlament had the confidence in me that they sent
by me ther[912] addresses to the king after he left the parlament and
went to Yorke. And it so fell out that I rode severall times, with
that expedition betwen London and Yorke (being one hundred and fivetey
miles) in 24 hours at a time.

Sir[913], pardon my boye's ignorance in writeing:

                                               JO. RUSHWORTH[914].

  Southwarke,
    July 21, 1687.

Mr.[915] Rushworth tells me he is superannuated. He hath forgott to
putt downe the name of the place where borne: as also that he was
secretary to Sir Orlando Bridgeman, when Lord Keeper of the great
seale, which was a considerable place.

[916]Yesterday I saw Mr. Rushworth: which was a great mortification. He
hath quite lost his memory with drinking brandy. Remembred nothing of
you, etc. His landlady wiped his nose like a child.

[917]John Rushworth, of Lincoln's Inne, esq., historian, died in the
Rules Court Alley in Southwarke, at the widow Bayley's house, a good
woman and who was very carefull and tendfull of him, on Monday the
twelfth day of May 1690[918]; and was buried the Wednesday following
behind the pulpit in St. George's church in Southwarke. He was about
83, onwards to 84. He had no son, but 3 or 4 daughters, virtuous
woemen: one is maried to Sir Francis Vane of ... in the north. He had
forgot his children before he died.




=Richard Sackville=, third earl of Dorset (1589-1624).


[919]Richard, earle of Dorset (eldest son[920] and heire to the Lord
Treasurer): he lived in the greatest grandeur of any nobleman of his
time in England. He had 30 gentlemen, and gave to each 50 _li._ per
annum, besides keeping his horse. George Villiers (after, duke of
Bucks) was a pe<ti>tioner to have had a gentleman's place under him,
and miss't it, and within a 12 moneth was a greater man himselfe; but
the duke ever after bore a grudge to the earl of Dorset.--from the
countesse of Thanet[921].




=Richard Sackville=, fifth earl of Dorset (1622-1677).


[922]Richard Sackville[BB], earle of Dorset[923], father of this earle
(Richard)--'twas he that translated[BC] _the Cid_, a French comoedie,
into English, about 1640.

Obiit anno Domini 167<7>; sepult. with his ancestors at Knoll in Kent.
He was a fellow of the Royall Societie. He maried <Frances> Cranfield,
daughter of the earle of Middlesex, by whome he had severall sonnes and
daughters.

His eldest sonne is Richard, earl of Dorset and Middlesex, a most noble
lord and my most kind friend.

Obiit 16<77>.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[BB] This note is in MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 20ᵛ. Aubrey gives in trick the
coat:--'quarterly <or and gules> over all a bend vair [Sackville];
impaling, <or>, on a pale <azure>, 3 fleur de lys <of the field>
[Cranfield],' surmounted by a coronet. The note contains some
confusions, which may be cleared up. (_a_) MS. Aubr. 8 was written in
1681, 'this earl' is therefore Charles, 6th earl (succeeded 1677, died
1706); but Aubrey twice calls him _Richard_. (_b_) The translation
of _the Cid_ appeared, part i in 1637, and part ii in 1640. It was
executed by Joseph Rutter (tutor to Richard, 5th earl) at the command
of Edward, 4th earl; and therefore the attribution of the translation
should be to Edward, 4th earl, who died 1652.

[BC] In MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 102ᵛ, Anthony Wood has written this
note:--'In pag.[924] 10, 'tis said that Richard, earl of Dorset,
translated into English a French comedy called _the Cid_, whereas both
the parts of it were done by Joseph Rutter.' To which Aubrey answers:
'It was Sam Butler told me that my lord of Dorset translated it.'--In
MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 9ᵛ, Aubrey writes: 'Sam. Butler (Hudebras) one time
at the tavern sayd that 'twas _this_ earl of Dorset's father that
translated the comoedie called _The Cid_, writt by Corneille. Me thinks
he should not be mistaken; but the world is mighty apt to it, you see.'




=Thomas Sackville=, first earl of Dorset (1536-1608).


[925]Epigram on the earle of Dorset, who dyed suddenly at the
council-boord.

    Uncivil death! that would'st not once conferre,
    Dispute, or parle with our treasurer,
    Had he been thee, or of thy fatall tribe,
    He would have spar'd thy life, and ta'ne a bribe.
    He that so often had, with gold and witt,
    Injur'd strong lawe, and almost conquer'd it,
    At length, for want of evidence to shewe,
    Was forc't himselfe to take a deadly blowe.

These verses I transcribed out of the collection of my honoured friend
and neighbour, Thomas Tyndale, esq.

Memorandum:--the tryall was with this Sir Richard Temple's great
grandfather[926]. The Lord Treasurer had in his bosome some writings,
which as he was pulling-out to give in evidience, sayed '_Here is
that will strike you dead!_' and as soon as he had spoken these
words, fell downe starke dead in the place.--from Sir Richard Temple.
(Memorandum:--an extraordinary perturbation of mind will bring an
apoplexie: I know severall instances of it.)

'Twas this lord that gott Salisbury house _cum appurtenantiis_, juxta
St. Bride's, in exchange for a piece of land, neer Cricklade in Wilts,
I thinke called Marston, but the title was not good, nor did the value
answer his promise.--from Seth, <bishop of> Sarum, who sayes that all
the parish of St. Bride's belonged to the bishop of Sarum, as also all
Shoe-lane.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

In an old common-place book, of date _circ._ 1612, in Lincoln College
library, is found this version of the lines:--

    Immodest death! that never wouldst confer,
    Dispute, nor parlé, with our Treasurer,
    Had he bene thou, or of thy fatall tribe,
    He would have saved thy life and ta'ne a bribe.
    He that so often, both with golde and witt,
    Had injurde law, and almost conquerde it;
    He that could strengthen causes, and was able
    To starve a sutor at the Counsell-table;
    At length, not having evidence to show,
    Was faine, good lord, to take his death: 'twas so.




=Robert Sanderson= (1587-166[2/3]).


[927]Dr. Robert Sanderson[BD], lord bishop of Lincoln, would confesse
to his intimate friends, that 'he studied and mastered only Tully's
Offices[LXXX.], Tho. Aquinas's Secunda Secundae and Aristotle's
Rhetorique, and that all other bookes he read but cursorily': but
he had forgott, by his favour, to speake of Aristot. Organon, etc.
(Logique bookes), els he could never have compiled his owne excellent
Logique,--from Seth Ward, bishop of Sarum, and <John> Pierson, bishop
of Chester, his great friends. And bishop Ward sayd that he[928] would
doe the like were he to begin the world again.

[LXXX.] <Samuel> Harsenet, archbishop of Yorke, alwayes carried it in
his bosome.

He was a lover of musique, and was wont to play on his base violl,
and also to sing to it. He was a lover of heraldry, and gave it in
chardge in his articles of enquiry; but the clergie-men made him such
a lamentable imperfect returne that it signified nothing. The very
Parliamentarians reverenced him for his learning and his vertue, so
that he alwayes kept his living, quod N.B. (the information in the
Oxon. Antiq.[BE] was false).

He had no great memorie, I am certaine not a sure one; when I was a
fresh-man and heard him read his first lecture, he was out in the
Lord's Prayer. He alwayes read his sermons and lectures. Had his
memorie been greater his judgement had been lesse: they are like two
well-bucketts.

In his Logique, he recommends disputation to young men, as the best
exercise for young witts. Under his picture, before his booke, is
'Aetat. 76, 1662.'


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[BD] Aubrey gives in trick the coat, as found under one of Sanderson's
engraved portraits:--'See of Lincoln; impaling, paly of six argent and
azure, a bend of the first, quartering, ermine, on a canton ..., a
cross engrailed ...' a crescent for difference.

[BE] i.e. Anthony Wood's _Hist. et Antiq. Univ. Oxon._ lib. ii. pag.
167, where Wood says 'his omnibus ... a Parliamento privatus est,'
including, i.e., his rectory of Boothby-Pagnall. In the _Athenae_ Wood
modified the statement, in accordance with what Aubrey says here.




=George Sandys= (1578-1643/4).


[929]In Boxley register thus:--'Georgius Sandys, poetarum Anglorum sui
saeculi facile princeps, sepultus fuit Martii 7, stilo Anglicano, anno
Domini 1643.'

I happened to speake with his niece, my lady Wyat, at whose howse,
viz. at Boxley abbey, he dyed. She saies he told her a little before he
dyed that he was about 63.

He lies buried in the chancel neer the dore on the south side, but
without any remembrance or stone--which is pitty so sweet a swan should
lye so ingloriously.

He had something in divinity ready for the presse, which my lady lost
in the warres--the title of it shee does not remember.




=William Saunderson= (15---1676).


[930]<In> Westminster abby[931] north aisle, the very place where
colonel ... Matthews his statue was erected by the Parliament, to whom
by his will he left all his estate.--This monument is of alablaster, a
bust, but no coate of armes.

                                 M.S.
                  Guliel. Saundersoni, equit. aurati
                 Regiaeque camerae generos. ordinar.,
                                 viri
       à natalibus, ab eruditione, ab invicta sua erga principes
                     fide, a scriptis, a candore,
                                clari.
         Scripsit inter alia inque lucem emisit vitarum Mariae
            Scotorum reginae, Jacobi, et Caroli I historias
                          idiomate Anglicano.
          Post varias clades sub nupera perduellium tyrannide
       acceptas, post diuturnos labores domi peregreque fortiter
          exantlatos, vitae hujus umbratilis satur, plus quam
              nonagenarius, animi tamen integer, transit
                             ad meliorem,
                 Julii 15 anno Christianorum MDCLXXVI.
                                 H.M.
              Conjugi optime de se merito quicum L annos
             concorditer vixerat Brigitta Edvardi Tyrelli
           eq. aurat. filia, virginumque nobilium sereniss.
           Catharinae reginae ancillantium (ut vocant) Mater
                                 M.P.

[932]Sir W. Saunderson:--he did read and write to his dying day.
Sir Christopher Wren said that as he wrote not well so he wrote not
ill. He dyed at Whitehall (I was then there): went out like a spent
candle--died before Dr. <William> Holder could come to him with the
sacrament. Quaere his family and coat of arms.




=Sir Henry Savile= (1549-1621/2).


[933]Sir Henry Savill[BF], knight, was borne in Yorkshire (vide A.
Wood's _Antiq. Oxon._).... He was a younger (or <son> of a younger)
brother, not borne to a foot of land. He came to Merton Coll. Oxon.
<1565>; made Warden there <1585>.

He was a learned gentleman, as most was of his time. He would faine
have been thought (I have heard Mr. Hobbes say) to have been as great a
scholar as Joseph Scaliger. But as for mathematiques, I have heard Dr.
Wallis say that he look't on him to be as able a mathematician as any
of his time. He was an extraordinary handsome and beautifull man; no
lady had a finer complexion.

Queen Elizabeth favoured him much; he read (I think) Greeke and
Politiques to her. He was also preferred to be Provost of Eaton
colledge <1596>.

He was a very severe governour, the scholars hated him for his
austerity. He could not abide _witts_: when a young scholar was
recommended to him for a good witt, '_Out upon him, I'le have nothing
to doe with him; give me the ploding student. If I would look for witts
I would goe to Newgate, there be the witts_[LXXXI.];' and John Earles
(afterwards bishop of Sarum) was the only scholar that ever he tooke as
recommended for a witt, which was from Dr. <William> Goodwyn, <dean> of
Christ Church.

[LXXXI.] This I was told[BG] by Robert Skinner, bishop of Oxon, 1646.

He was not only a severe governor, but old Mr. Yates[BH] (who was
fellow in his time) would make lamentable complaints of him to his
dyeing day, that he did oppresse the fellows grievously, and he was so
great and a favourite to the Queen, that there was no dealing with
him; his naeve was that he was too much inflated with his learning and
riches.

He was very munificent, as appeares by the two lectures he has given of
Astronomy and Geometry. Bishop Seth Ward, of Sarum, has told me that
he first sent for Mr. <Edmund> Gunter, from London, (being of Oxford
university) to have been his[934] Professor of Geometrie: so he came
and brought with him his sector and quadrant, and fell to resolving of
triangles and doeing a great many fine things. Said the grave knight,
'_Doe you call this reading of Geometrie? This is shewing of tricks,
man!_' and so dismisst him with scorne, and sent for <Henry> Briggs,
from Cambridge.

I have heard Dr. Wallis say, that Sir H. Savill has sufficiently
confuted Joseph Scaliger de Quadratura Circuli, in the very margent
of the booke: and that sometimes when J. Scaliger sayes 'A B = C D ex
constructione,' Sir H. Savill writes sometimes in the margent, 'Et
dominatio vestra est asinus ex constructione.'

He left only one daughter, which was[935]maried to Sir ... Sedley,
of ... in Kent, mother to this present Sir Charles Sedley, who well
resembles his grandfather Savill in the face, but is not so proper a
man.

Sir H. Savill dyed at, and was buried at Eaton colledge, in the
chapell, on the south east side of the chancell, under a faire black
marble grave-stone, with this inscription:--

                   *       *       *       *       *
                   *       *       *       *       *

He had travelled very well, and had a generall acquaintance with the
learned men abroad; by which meanes he obtained from beyond sea, out of
their libraries, severall rare Greeke MSS., which he had copied by an
excellent amanuensis for the Greeke character.

... putt a trick upon him, for he gott a friend to send him weekely
over to ... in Flanders (I thinke), the sheetes of the curious
Chrysostome that were printed at Eaton, and translated them into
Latin, and printed them Greeke and Latin together, which quite spoyled
the sale of Sir Henry's.

Memorandum:--he gave his collection of mathematicall bookes to a
peculiar little library belonging to the Savillian Professors[BI].


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[BF] Aubrey gives in trick the coat:--'argent, on a bend sable, 3 owls
of the field [Savile].'

[BG] Aubrey seems to have had a special interest in this story.
He notes it twice in MS. Aubr. 21 (fol. 2, and fol. 4):--'Sir H.
Savile--If you'l have witts, goe to Newgate.'

[BH] Leonard Yates, fellow of Merton in 1593, rector of Cuxham, co.
Oxon., 1608, died 1662, aged _circ._ 92. His son, John Yates, was M.A.
of Trinity in 1639, and probably Aubrey knew him there.

[BI] This Collection was incorporated with the Bodleian in 1884:
Macray's _Annals of the Bodleian_, p. 329. Stephen Peter Rigaud
(Savilian Professor of Geometry 1810-1827, and of Astronomy 1827-1839)
had, in his time, thoroughly examined it, and found many books missing.




=Sylvanus Scory= (15-- -1617).


[936]Sylvanus Scory (quaere if he was not knighted?) was the son and
heire of <John> Scory, bishop of Hereford.

His father, John Skory, in the raigne of King Edward the Sixt, was
bishop of Rochester, and translated from thence to Chichester, and
afterwards to Hereford; 'who departed this life, at his house, at
Whitburn, in com. Hereff., 26 Junii, Anno Domini 1585'--this out of an
epitaph on his wife Elizabeth, who hath an inscription in St. Leonard's
Shoreditch church.

He was a very handsome gentleman, and had an excellent witt, and his
father gave him the best education, both at home and beyond the seas,
that that age would afford, and loved him so dearly that he fleeced
the church of Hereford to leave him a good estate, and he did let
such long, and so many, leases, that, as Mʳⁱˢ Masters (daughter of
Herbert Westphaling, esq., eldest son and heir to bishop Westphaling,
of Hereford) told me, they were not out till about these 60 yeares.
To my best remembrance, she told me the estate left him was 1500 _li._
per annum, which he reduced to nothing (alloweing himselfe the libertie
to enjoy all the pleasures of this world), and left his sonne so poor,
that when he came among gentlemen, they would fancy a crowne or ten
shillings[937] for him.

I have heard Sir John Denham say (at Chalke, 1652), that he haz been
well enformed that he was the most accomplished gentleman of his time.
'Tis a good testimoniall of his worth, that Mr. Benjamin Johnson (who
ever scorned an unworthy patrone) dedicated his ... to him. I have
heard Sir John Denham also say that he was the greatest confident and
intimate favorite of Monsieur of France (brother to the French king),
who was a suitor to queen Elizabeth, and whom her majestie entirely
loved (and as a signall of it one time at St. Paule's church, London,
openly kissed him in time of divine service) and would have had him for
her husband, but only for reasons of state. When her majestie dismissed
him, 'twas donne with all passion and respecte imaginable. She gave him
royall presents; he was attended to Dover by the flower of the court;
among others, by this sparke of whom I now write. When Monsieur tooke
his leave of him he told him that though 'twas so that her majestie
could not marie him (as aforesayd), yet he knew that she so much loved
him that she would not deny him any request, wherby he might honour
and benefit a friend; and accordingly writes his love-letter to his
mistresse, the queen of England, and in it only begges that single
_bôn_[938], to looke upon Mr. Scorie (the bearer) with a particular
and extraordinary grace, for his sake; delivered[939] him the letter
(and as I take it, gave him a jewell). As Sylvanus returned to London,
through Canterbury, the mayer there (a shoemaker), a pragmaticall
fellow, examined him, who and whence, etc. and what his business was,
and if he had a passe? 'Yes,' quod he, 'I have a passe,' and produces
Monsieur's letter, superscribed to her majestie, which, one would
have thought, had been enough to have shewen. The mayor presently[940]
breakes open the love-letter, and reades it. I know not how, this
action happened to take wind, and 'twas brought to court, and became so
ridicule that Sylvanus Scory was so laughed at and jeer'd that he never
delivered the letter to the queen, which had been the easiest and most
honourable step to preferment that mortall man could have desired.




=John Securis.=


[941]I have heard my old great-uncle, Mr. Thomas Browne, say that when
he was a school boy there was one Dr. Securis a noted physitian at
Salisbury (who was contemporary with this Dr. Mouffett[942]). He writt
Almanacks--I have only seen two, which Henry Coley haz, which were for
the yeares of our Lord 15[81[943]].

1580, a prognostication for the yeare of our Lord God MDLXXX, made and
written in Salisbury by John Securis, Maister of Artes and Physick.
London, cum privilegio regiae majestatis.

1581, eodem autore, wherunto is joynd a compendium or brief instruction
how to keepe a moderate diet. London, etc.--Vide his preface wherin he
speakes ☞ of haile-stones neer Salisbury as big as a child's fist of
three or fower yeeres old.




=Dorothy Selby.=


[944]From Mr. Marshall[945]:--

                               Dedicated
                          to the pious memory
                                  of
                          Dame Dorothy Selby
                                [etc.]

          She was a Dorcas
    Whose curious needle turn'd the abused stage
    Of this lewd world into a golden age:
    Whose pen of steele, and silken inke, enroll'd
    The acts of Jona in records of gold;
    Whose art disclos'd that plott, which had it taken,
    Rome had triumph't and Britaine's walls had shaken.
          Shee was
    In heart a Lydia, and in tongue a Hanna,
    In zeale a Ruth, in wedlock a Susanna.
    Prudently simple, providently wary,
    To the world a Martha, and to heaven a Mary.




=John Selden= (1584-1654).


[946]Mr. John Selden when young did copie[947] records for Sir Robert
Cotton--from Fabian Philips.

[948]John Selden, esq., was borne (as appeares by his epitaph, which
he himselfe made, as I well remember archbishop Usher, Lord Primate,
who did preach his funerall sermon, did then mention scil. as to _spe
certae resurrectionis_) at Salvinton, a hamlet belonging to West
Terring, in the com. of Sussex.

His father was a yeomanly man, of about fourty pounds per annum, and
played well on the violin, in which he tooke delight, and at Christmas
time, to please him selfe and his neighbours, he would play to them as
they danced. My old lady Cotton[LXXXII.] (wife to Sir Robert Cotton,
grandmother to this Sir <John> Cotton) was one time at Sir Thomas
Alford's, in Sussex, at dinner, in Christmas time, and Mr. John Selden
(then a young student) sate at the lower end of the table, who was
lookt upon then to be of parts extraordinary, and some body asking who
he was, 'twas replyed, his son that is playing on the violin <in> the
hall[LXXXIII.]. I have heard Michael Malet (judge[BJ] Malet's son) say,
that he had heard that Mr. John Selden's father taught on the lute. He
had a pretty good estate by his wife.

[LXXXII.] She was living in 1646, or 1647, an old woman, 80+.

[LXXXIII.] This from Sir William Dugdale, from the lady Cotton.--Mr.
Fabian Philips told me that when J. Selden was young he did copie
records for Sir Robert Cotton.

He (vide A. Wood's _Antiq. Oxon._) was of Hart-hall in Oxon, and Sir
Giles Mompesson told me that he was then of that house[BK], and that he
was a long scabby-pold boy, but a good student.

Thence he came to the Inner Temple. His chamber was in the paper
buildings which looke towards the garden, ... staire-case, uppermost
story, where he had a little gallery to walke in.

He was quickly taken notice of for his learning, and was sollicitor and
steward to the earl of Kent[BL], whose countesse (was) an ingeniose
woman....[949] After the earle's death he married her. He had a
daughter[950], if not two, by ...; one was maried to a tradesman in
Bristowe.... Mris. Williamson, one of my lady's woemen, a lusty,
bouncing woman, ... robbed him on his death-bed....

His great friend heretofore was Mr. ... Hayward, to whom he dedicates
his _Titles of Honour_; also Ben Johnson.

His treatise that Tythes were not _jure divino_ drew[951] a great deale
of envy upon him from the clergie. W. Laud, archbishop of Canterbury,
made him make his recantation before the High Commission Court, of
which you may have an account in Dr. Peter Heylen's Historie. After,
he would never forgive the bishops, but did still in his writings
levell them with the presbyterie. He was also severe and bitter in his
speeches against ship-money, which speeches see.

He was one of the Assembly of Divines, and <Bulstrode> Whitlock, in
his memoires, sayes that he was wont to mock the Assembly men about
their little gilt Bibles, and would baffle them sadly: sayd he, 'I doe
consider the original.'

[952]<Richard> Montague, <bishop> of Norwich, was his great
antagonist; vide the bookes writt against each other.

He never owned the mariage with the countesse of Kent till after her
death, upon some lawe account. He never kept any servant peculiar,
but my ladie's were all at his command; he lived with her _in Aedibus
Carmeliticis_ (White Fryers), which was, before the conflagration, a
noble dwelling.

He kept a plentifull table, and was never without learned company. He
rose at ... clock in the morning (quaere Sir J. C.[BM]) and went to bed
at....

He was temperate in eating and drinking. He had a slight stuffe, or
silke, kind of false carpet, to cast[953] over the table where he read
and his papers lay[954], when a stranger came-in, so that he needed not
to displace[955] his bookes or papers.

He wrote ...: vide A. Wood's _Antiq. Oxon._ for the catalogue of the
bookes writt by him.

He dyed of a dropsey; he had his funerall scutcheons all ready ...
moneths before he dyed.

When he was neer death, the minister (Mr. <Richard> Johnson) was
comeing to him to assoile him: Mr. Hobbes happened then to be there;
sayd he, 'What, will you that have wrote like a man, now dye like a
woman?' So the minister was not let in.

He dyed _in Aedibus Carmeliticis_ (aforesayd) the last day of November,
Anno Domini 1654; and on Thursday, the 14th day of December, was
magnificently buryed in the Temple church. His executors were Matthew
Hales (since Lord Chiefe Justice of the King's Bench), John Vaughan
(since Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas), and Rowland Jewkes,
Esq.: quaere the fourth executor[BN]. They invited all the Parliament
men, all the benchers, and great officers. All the judges had[956]
mourning, as also an abundance of persons of quality. The Lord Primate
of Ireland, <James> Usher, preach't his funerall sermon.

His grave was about ten foot deepe or better, walled up a good way
with bricks, of which also the bottome was paved, but the sides at the
bottome for about two foot high were of black polished marble, wherein
his coffin (covered with black bayes) lyeth, and upon that wall of
marble was presently lett downe a huge black marble stone of great
thicknesse, with this inscription:

                _Heic jacet corpus Johannis Seldeni, qui
                     obiit 30 die Novembris, 1654._

Over this was turned an arch of brick (for the house would not loose
their grownd), and upon that was throwne the earth, etc. and on the
surface lieth another faire grave-stone of black marble, with this
inscription:

                  I. SELDENVS, I. C. _heic situs est_.

This coate[957] ('..., 3 roses on a fess, between 3 swans' necks,
erased, collared' [this is the coate of Baker]) is on the flatt marble;
but is, indeed, the coate of his mother, for he had none of his owne,
though he so well deserved it. 'Tis strange (me thinke) that he would
not have one.

On the side of the wall above, is a faire[958] inscription of white
marble: the epitaph he made himselfe as is before sayd, and Marchamond
Needham, making mention of it in his _Mercurius Politicus_, sayd 'twas
well he did it, for no man els could doe it for him. He was buried by
Mr. <Richard> Johnson, then Master of the Temple, the directory way,
where Mr. Johnson tooke an occasion to say[BO], 'a learned man sayes
that when a learned man dies a great deale of learning dies with him:
then certainly in this,' etc.

                         [959]JOANNES SELDENUS
                           heic juxta situs,
                  Natus est XVI Decembris, MDLXXXIV,
                             Salvintoniae,
                 Qui viculus est Terring occidentalis
                        in Sussexiae maritimis,
                         Parentibus honestis,
                     Joanne Seldeno Thomae filio,
                           e quinis secundo,
                           Anno MDXLI nato,
                                  et
                   Margareta filia et haerede unica
                     Thomae Bakeri de Rushington,
               ex equestri Bakerorum in Cantio familia,
                  filius e cunis superstitum unicus,
                       aetatis fere LXX annorum.
                   Denatus est ultimo die Novembris,
                    Anno Salutis Reparatae MDCLIV,
                        per quam expectat heic
                           +RESVRRECTIONEM+
                               Felicem.

He would tell his intimate friends, Sir Bennet Hoskyns, etc., that
he had nobody to make his heire, except it were a milke-mayd, and
that such people did not know what to doe with a great estate.
Memorandum:--bishop Grostest, of Lincoln, told his brother, who asked
him to make him a grate man; 'Brother,' said he, 'if your plough is
broken, I'le pay the mending of it; or if an oxe is dead, I'le pay for
another: but a plough-man I found you, and a plough-man I'le leave
you'--Fuller's _Holy State_, p....

He never used any artificiall help to strengthen his memorie: 'twas
purely naturall.

He was very tall, I guesse about 6 foot high; sharp ovall face; head
not very big; long nose inclining to one side; full popping eie (gray).
He was a poet[LXXXIV.], and Sir John Suckling brings him in the
'Session of the Poets.'

[LXXXIV.] He haz a learned copie of verses before Hopton's 'Concordance
of Yeares'; before Ben Jonson's Workes; &c.

    The poets met, the other day,
    And Apollo was at the meeting, they say,
           *       *       *       *       *
    'Twas strange to see how they flocked together:
    There was Selden, and he stood next to the chaire,
    And Wenman not far off, which was very faire,
    etc.

He was one of the assembly of divines in those dayes (as was also his
highnesse ... Prince Elector Palatine[BP]), and was like a thorne in
their sides; for he did baffle and vexe[960] them; for he was able to
runne them all downe with his Greeke and antiquities.

Sir Robert Cotton (the great antiquary, that collected the library) was
his great friend, whose son, Sir Thomas Cotton, was obnoxious to the
Parliament, and skulked in the countrey: Mr. Selden had the key and
command of the library, and preserved it, being then a Parliament man.

He intended to have given his owne library to the University of
Oxford[LXXXV.], but received disobligation from them, for that they
would not lend him some MSS.; wherfore by his will he left it to the
disposall of his executors, who gave it to the Bodlean library, at Oxon.

[LXXXV.] Memorandum:--Mr. Fabian Philips says that Mr. Selden had given
his library to Oxford at first, but that the University had disobliged
<him> by not lending him a MS. or MSS.

He understood ... languages:--Latin, Greeke, Hebrew, Arabique, besides
the learned modern.

In his writing of ... he used his learned friend, Mr. Henry Jacob, of
Merton College, who did transcribe etc. for him, and as he was writing,
would many times putt-in things of his owne head, which Mr. Selden did
let stand, as he does, in his preface, acknowledge.

In his younger yeares he affected obscurity of style, which, after, he
quite left off, and wrote perspicuously. 'Twill be granted that he was
one of the greatest critiques of his time.

I remember my sadler who wrought many yeares to that family[961] told
me that Mr. Selden had got more by his marriage then he had done by his
practise. He was no eminent practiser at barre; not but that he was or
might have been able enough; but after he had got a _dulce ocium_ he
chiefly addicted himselfe to his more ingeniose studies and records.

I have heard some divines say (I know not if maliciously) that 'twas
true he was a man of great reading, but gave not his owne sentiment.

He was wont to say 'I'le keepe myselfe warme and moyst as long as I
live, for I shall be cold and dry when I am dead.'

[962]John Selden, esq., would write sometimes, when notions came
into his head, to preserve them, under his barber's hands. When he
dyed his barber sayd he had a great mind to know his will, 'For,'
sayd he, 'I never knew a wise man make a wise will.' He bequeathed
his estate (40,000 _li._ value) to four executors, viz. Lord Chiefe
Justice Hales, Lord Chief Justice Vaughan, Rowland Jukes, and ... (his
flatterer)--from Fabian Philips.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[BJ] Sir Thomas Mallet, Justice of the King's Bench 1641-45, 1660-63.

[BK] John Selden matric. at Hart Hall Oct. 24, 1600, aged 15. Giles
Mompesson matric. at Hart Hall, same day, aged 16.

[BL] Henry Grey succeeded as 7th earl of Kent in 1623, died 1639. His
widow Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Gilbert Talbot, 7th earl of
Shrewsbury, died Dec. 7, 1651, bequeathing her estate to Selden.

[BM] It is not clear whether this is 'Sir J. C.' or 'Sir J. H.' (in a
monogram). If the former, perhaps 'Sir John Cotton'; if the latter, as
is more probable, then perhaps Sir John Hoskyns, son of Sir Bennet, p.
223.

[BN] Anthony Wood adds the note: 'Vide Collect. ex Convoc. 1653,' i.e.
Wood's own Collections ex reg. Convoc. Oxon. (MS. Bodl. 594): see
Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, i. 187, 209.

[BO] Reported slightly more fully by Aubrey, writing April 7, 1673,
in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 199ᵛ:--'Mr. Johnson, minister of the Temple,
buryed him, secundum usum Directory, where, amongst other things, he
quoted "the sayeing of a learned man" (he did not name him) "that when
a learned man dies, there dyes a great deale of learning with him,"
and that "if learning could have kept a man alive our brother had not
dyed."'

[BP] Charles Louis. 'He received permission from the House of Commons
to sit and hear on Oct. 24, <1643>, but does not seem to have actually
made his appearance till the 28th: when an address of welcome was made
by the Prolocutor, Dr. <William> Twisse, who had been at one time
chaplain to the princess <his mother>, and a reply was made by the
prince. Somewhat fragmentary notes of his speech are found in the first
volume of the minutes of the Westminster Assembly, which has never
been published'--a note kindly sent me by Dr. A. F. Mitchell, Emeritus
Professor of Ecclesiastical History in St. Andrews.




=William Shakespear= (1564-1616).


[963]Mr. William Shakespear was borne at Stratford upon Avon in the
county of Warwick. His father was a butcher, and I have been told
heretofore by some of the neighbours, that when he was a boy he
exercised his father's trade, but when he kill'd a calfe he would doe
it in a high style, and make a speech. There was at that time another
butcher's son in this towne that was held not at all inferior to him
for a naturall witt, his acquaintance and coetanean, but dyed young.

This William being inclined naturally to poetry and acting, came to
London, I guesse, about 18; and was an actor at one of the play-houses,
and did act exceedingly well (now B. Johnson was never a good actor,
but an excellent instructor).

He began early to make essayes at dramatique poetry, which at that time
was very lowe; and his playes tooke well.

He was a handsome, well shap't man: very good company, and of a very
readie and pleasant smooth witt.

The humour of ... the constable, in _Midsomernight's Dreame_, he
happened to take at Grendon in Bucks--I thinke it was Midsomer night
that he happened to lye there--which is the roade from London to
Stratford, and there was living that constable about 1642, when I first
came to Oxon: Mr. Josias Howe is of that parish, and knew him. Ben
Johnson and he did gather humours of men dayly where ever they came.
One time as he was at the tavern at Stratford super Avon, one Combes,
an old rich usurer, was to be buryed, he makes there this extemporary
epitaph,

    Ten in the hundred the Devill allowes,
    But Combes will have twelve, he sweares and vowes:
    If any one askes who lies in this tombe,
    'Hoh!' quoth the Devill, ''Tis my John o Combe.'

He was wont to goe to his native countrey once a yeare. I thinke I have
been told that he left 2 or 300 _li._ per annum there and thereabout to
a sister. Vide his epitaph in Dugdale's Warwickshire.

I have heard Sir William Davenant and Mr. Thomas Shadwell (who is
counted the best comoedian we have now) say that he had a most
prodigious witt, and did admire his naturall parts beyond all other
dramaticall writers. He was wont to say (B. Johnson's _Underwoods_)
that he 'never blotted out a line in his life'; sayd Ben: Johnson, 'I
wish he had blotted-out a thousand.'

His comoedies will remaine witt as long as the English tongue is
understood, for that he handles _mores hominum_. Now our present
writers reflect so much upon particular persons and coxcombeities, that
twenty yeares hence they will not be understood.

Though, as Ben: Johnson sayes of him, that he had but little Latine
and lesse Greek, he understood Latine pretty well, for he had been
in his younger yeares a schoolmaster in the countrey.--from Mr. ...
Beeston[964].




=Ralph Sheldon= (1623-1684).


[965]Ralph Sheldon, of Beoley, esq., natus at Weston, Warwickshire,
Aug. 4, 1623, about 5 of the clock in the morning.

Memorandum the plott brake out in Oct. 1678. His house was search't; he
disarmed; and afterwards a prisoner at Warwick.

Anno ..., very like to dye of a dropsey--quaere Sir Thomas Millington
de hoc.

Faire Madam Frances Sheldon (one of the maydes of honour[966]) was born
24 Febr. at 8 or 9 at night. She was 23 last Febr. (1677/8).


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

This Ralph Sheldon was Anthony Wood's friend: see Clark's Wood's _Life
and Times_, ii. 227, iii. 98.




=John Sherburne= (1616-1635).


[967]Sir Edward Shirbourn, knight, natus 18º Sept. A.D. 1616, hora 10
A.M. A little past halfe an hower after was born his twin brother John,
who died anno aetatis 19º.

Both were borne before eleaven a clock; both excellent scholars; and
excellent poets.

John, before he dyed, translated Ovid's Epistles, and better (I am
informed, by Sir Edward, and John Davys of Kidwelly) then any we have
in print.




=James Shirley= (1594-1666).


[968]James Shirley:--capt. <Edward> Shirburne, and Mr. <Thomas> Stanley
(<author of> _de vitis philosophorum_, who was his scholar), say that
he was of no University: bred a Paule's schole scholar.

He taught in Shoe lane: quaere.




=Thomas Shirley= (1638-1678).


[969]Thomas Shirley[BQ], M.D., of Weston-neston in Suffolk, edidit[BR]
'A true and perfect account of the examination confession tryall and
condemnation, and execution of Joan Perry and her two sonnes for
the supposed murther of Mr. William Harrison, being one of the most
remarkable occurrences that hath happened in the memory of man': Lond.,
for Rowland Reynolds next Arundel gate opposite to St. Clements Church,
1676, stitch't, 4to.

Vide in <Sir Thomas> Herbert's travells, where are honourable
remembrances of his relations in Persia.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[BQ] Aubrey gives in trick the coat:--'paly of 6, or and azure, a
canton ermine.'

[BR] Anthony Wood notes here:--'This was written by Sir Thomas Overbury
of Bourton on the hill to Dr. Thomas Shirley.' See Clark's Wood's _Life
and Times_, i. 452.




=John Sloper.=


[970]Mrs. Abigail Sloper [Grove] borne at Broad Chalke neer Salisbury,
A.D. 1648 (the widowe Chalke sayeth 'twas on a Thursday). She was
baptized May 4th, 1648. Goodwife Smyth (then a servant there) sayeth
she beleeves she was borne 14 of Aprill. Pride; lechery; ungratefull
to her father; maried, ...; runne distracted, ...; recovered,....

John Sloper, my godson, baptized Feb. 7, 1649.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

John Sloper, father of these two, was vicar of Broad Chalk, Wilts.; see
in the life of John Hales.




=Jane Smyth= (1649-16--).


[971]Mris Jane Smyth borne at ... the 15th of April 1649, between
fower and 5 a clock in the morning.--She was told on Venus's day, i.e.
Fryday[972]: if not so, 'twas on a Tuesday. It was the April after the
beheading King Charles the first. It thundered and lightened and the
house was on fire then.

My almanac, 1676, says the _natalis_ was the 14th April[973]--quod
N.B.: but Mrs. J. S. tells me again 'twas the fifteenth.

About 7 yeares old she lived in Sussex, Redhill, neer which Mr.
Bradshaw, schoolmaster, lived--uxores germanorum.

On her trunk is:--

                                 1662,
                                 I. Ƨ.

She came the second time to London halfe a yeare before the great
plague in 1665.

She was sick of a feaver A.D. 1665; she sayd, not in London.

She was like to dye of St. Anthonie's fire about Michaelmas 1675. Mris
Smyth fell sick dangerously of a pleurisie about the first weeke of
October 1675. About the latter end of March 1675/6 she had a terrible
chronicall disease[974], under which she laboured a 12 month or +. The
first weeke in August 1683, in extreme danger of death by a suppression
of urine, the ureters being stopped.

[975]Now I conclude with an earnest request that you would please to
enquire for a colledge lease, as you did for Edward Shirbourne[976]
(whom nobody can find[977]). It is for that obliging body, Mris Smith,
that lives with Mr. Wyld. They cohabite, as Mary, countess of Pembroke,
with Sir Martin Lister. I owe most of Mr. Wyld's civility from her
goodness. And herein you will doe me the greatest kindness that you
could imagine, for I am more obliged to her than to anybody. I beseech
you, for God's sake, to mind this humble request of mine.




=Charles Snell= (1639-16--).


[978]Charles Snell, armiger, natus December 30, 1639, between 8 and 9
P.M. He maried September 1672.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

Charles Snell lived near Fordingbridge in Hampshire. He occurs in these
'Brief Lives' and other Aubrey MSS. as a frequent correspondent of
Aubrey's on matters astrological.




=John Speed= (1542-1629).


[979]He is in effigie, a faire monument, not much unlike Mr. Camden, in
the south side of the chancell of St. Giles Cripplegate[980].

                          P.M. Charissimorum
                               Parentum

                   Johannis Speed civis Londinensis,
            mercatorum scissorum fratris, servi fidelissimi
                    regiarum majestatum Elizabethae
              Jacobi et Caroli nunc superstitis, terrarum
                 nostrarum geographi accurati et fidi,
               Antiquitatis Britannicae historiographi,
            Geneologiae sacrae elegantissimi delineatoris,
                   qui postquam annos 77 superaverat
               non tam morbo confectus quam mortalitatis
                  taedio lassatus, corpore se levavit
              July 28, 1629, et jucundissimo Redemptoris
                     sui desiderio sursum elatus,
                carnem hic in custodiam deposuit, denuò
                    cum Christus venerit recepturus
                et Susannae suae suavissimae <conjugis>
                 quae postquam duodecim illi filios et
               sex filias pepererat, annos quinquaginta
                       septem junctis utriusque
               solatiis cum illo vixerat, liberos gravi
                     et frequenti hortamine ad Dei
                  cultum sollicitaverat, pietatis et
               charitatis opere quotidiano praeluxerat,
                        emori demum erudiit suo
                  exemplo quae septuagenaria placide
                    in Christo obdormivit, et fidei
                      suae mercedem habuit Martii
                      vicesimo octavo Anno Domini
                              MDCXXVIII.




=John Speidell.=


[981]Mr. ... Spiedell:--he taught mathematiques in London, and
published a booke in quarto named Spiedel's Geometrical Extractions
(London[982], 163-), which made young men have a love to geometrie.




=Sir Henry Spelman= (1562-1641).


[983]Sir Henry Spelman, knight, borne at ... (quaere Henry Spelman, his
grandson).

From Mr. Justice Ball[984] at Windsore:--when he was about 10 or 12 he
went to schoole to a curs't schoolmaster, to whom he had an antipathie.
His master would discountenance him, and was very severe to him, and
to a dull boy he would say _as very a dunce as H. Spelman_. He was
a boy of great spirit, and would not learne there. He was (upon his
importunity) sent <to> another schoolmaster, and profited very well. I
have heard his grandson say, that the Spelmans' witts open late.

He was much perplexed with lawe-suites and worldly troubles, so that
he was about 40 before he could settle himselfe to make any great
progresse in learning, which when he did, we find what great monuments
of antiquarian knowledge he has left to the world. W. Laud, archbishop
of Canterbury, had a great esteeme for him, and made him one of the ...
of the High Commission Court; yet (he being one that was extreme rigid
as to the licensing of bookes, and against any _nouvelle_) hindred the
printing of the 2d part of his Glossary, which began at M, where there
were three M's that scandalized the Archbishop, viz.--_Magna Charta_;
_Magnum Consilium Regis_; and....

From George Lee:--he was a handsome gentleman (as appeares by his
picture in Bibliotheca Cottoniana), strong and valiant, and wore
allwayes his sword, till he was about 70 or +, when, finding his legges
to faulter through feeblenes as he was walking, 'Now,' said he, ''tis
time to leave off my sword.'

When his daughter-in-lawe (Sir John's wife) returned home from
visitting her neighbours, he would alwaies aske her what of antiquity
she had heard or observed, and if she brought home no such account, he
would chide her (jestingly).

He lies buried in the south crosse-aisle of Westminster abbey, at the
foot of the pillar opposite to Mr. Camden's monument, but without
any word of inscription or monument hitherto (1680).[985]I very well
remember his penon that hung-up there, but it was either taken downe
or fell downe when the scaffolds were putt up at the coronation of his
majestie king Charles II.

Sir William Dugdale knew Sir Henry Spelman, and sayes he was as tall as
his grandson, Harry Spelman. He haz been told that Sir Henry did not
understand Latin perfectly till he was fourty years old. He said to Sir
William, 'We are beholding to Mr. Speed and Stowe for _stitching_ up
for us our English History.' It seemes they were both taylers--quod N.B.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

Aubrey notes that he was of 'Cambr.'; and gives in trick the
coat:--'sable, 9 plates between two flaunches argent,' and adds, 'the
crest is a wyld man.'




=Edmund Spenser= (1553-1598/9).


[986]Mr. Edmund Spencer was of Pembrooke-hall in Cambridge; he misst
the fellowship there which bishop Andrewes gott. He was an acquaintance
and frequenter of Sir Erasmus Dreyden. His mistris, Rosalind, was a
kinswoman of Sir Erasmus' lady's. The chamber there at Sir Erasmus'
is still called Mr. Spencer's chamber. Lately, at the College
takeing-downe the wainscot of his chamber, they found an abundance of
cards, with stanzas of the 'Faerie Queen' written on them.--from John
Dreyden, esq., Poet Laureate.

Mr. Beeston sayes he was a little man, wore short haire, little band
and little cuffs.

[987]Edmund Spenser:--Mr. Samuel Woodford (the poet, who paraphras'd
the Psalmes) lives in Hampshire neer Alton, and he told me that Mr.
Spenser lived sometime in these parts, in this delicate sweet ayre;
where he enjoyed his muse, and writt good part of his verses. I
have said before that Sir Philip Sydney and Sir Walter Ralegh were
his acquaintance. He had lived some time in Ireland, and wrote[988]
a description of it, which is printed with Morison's History, or
Description, of Ireland.

Sir John Denham told me, that archbishop Usher, Lord Primate of Armagh,
was acquainted with him, by this token: when Sir William Davenant's
_Gondibert_ came forth, Sir John askt the Lord Primate if he had seen
it. Said the Primate, 'Out upon him, with his vaunting preface, he
speakes against my old friend, Edmund Spenser.'

In the south crosse-aisle of Westminster abbey, next the dore, is this
inscription:

[Sidenote: ☞]

  'Heare lies (expecting the second comeing of our Saviour Christ
    Jesus) the body of Edmund Spencer, the Prince of Poets of his tyme;
    whose divine spirit needs no other witnesse then the workes which
    he left behind him. He was borne in London, in the yeare 1510, and
    dyed in the yeare 1596.'




=William Stafford= (1593-1684).

=Robert Stafford= (1588-1644).


[989]William Stafford, of Thornbury in com. Gloc., esq., descended of
the family of the duke of Buckingham, was a student of Christ Church,
Oxon. Old Dr. Fell[990] was his tutor. About 30 yeares + since[991] he
printed a pamphlet, viz. _The reasons of the warre_. I thinke he was
a parliament man--but of that party he was. He dyed about May last,
1684, aged ... <at> Thornbury.

[992]Dorothy, sister to William Stafford aforesayd, married to her
first husband, <Robert> Stafford, her kinsman, who was of Exeter Coll.,
and pupill to Dr. John Prideaulx. He wrote a thin 4to Geographie, which
I have read. I remember he begins thus:--

'Indignation made Juvenal a poet and me a geographer.'




=Thomas Stanley= (1625-1678).


[993]Thomas Stanley, esqr., son to Sir Thomas Stanley, born at
Cumberlow....

His praeceptor, Mr. William Fairfax, in his father's howse.

Was of Pembrooke hall in Cambridge, where he took the degree of Master
of Arts.

Was admitted _ad eundem gradum_ in Oxford.

Writ his poems about the years 1646, 1647.

His History of Philosophy, in the years 1655, 1656.

His Aeschylus about the same time.

Dy'd April 12, 1678. Buried at St. Martin's in the Fields, in the
middle isle.

His eldest sonne is Thomas Stanley, esq., of the Middle Temple,
jurisconsultus[994]. He hath left two other sonnes, viz. 2. George, 3.
Charles.

Thomas Stanley, the sonne, aforesayd, translated Aelian's _Variae
Historiae_ at 14 yeares of age. He was also of Pembrooke-hall in
Cambridge.

Quaere his sonne pro nativitate patris and also of what age he was when
he went to Cambridge.




=Richard Staper= (15--- 1608).


[995]Richard Staper, alderman of London:--On the south wall of
St. Martin Outwich church, London, is a faire monument with this
inscription, viz.--

    Here resteth the bodie of the worshipfull Richard Staper,
    elected alderman of this citty anno 1594. He was the greatest
    merchant in his time, the chiefest actor in the discovery
    of the trades of Turkey and East India, a man humble in
    prosperity, painfull and ever ready in affaires publique, and
    discreetly carefull of his private, a liberall howsekeeper,
    bountifull to the poore, an upright dealer in the world, and
    a divout aspirer after the world to come, much blessed in his
    posterity, and happy in his and their allyaunces. He dyed the
    last June anno Domini 1608.

                          Intravit ut exiret.

Besides the figures of himselfe and wife are 5 sonnes and 4 daughters.
At the top of the monument is a shippe.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

Aubrey gives in trick three coats:--(1) 'argent, a cross between 4
estoyles sable'; (2) the same; impaling, ..., a cross ...; (3) the coat
of the clothworkers' company, viz., <sable> a chevron ermine between <2
hauettes> in chief <argent> and in base <a teazel or>.




=Thomas Stapleton= (1535-1598).


[996]Thomas Stapleton, D.D., e Societate Jesu (vide Anthony Wood's
_Antiq. Oxon._) was born at Henford[997] in Sussex, which is about the
middle of the river that runnes to Shoreham.

He was formerly of New Colledge in Oxon. ☞ Quaere of attorneys of that
countrey if his familie continues[998] in those parts still: and if so,
if his picture is there or elswhere; and quaere for it at the Convent
at Lovaine where he died. Dr. John[999] Lamphire, principall of Hart
Hall, would present it to the Schooles[1000].


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

Thomas Stapleton, of Henfield, Sussex, adm. probationer of New College
Jan. 18, 1552/3; adm. Fellow Jan. 18, 1554/5: resigned his fellowship
in 1559.




=Thomas Stephens= (1620-16--).


[1001]Mr. Steevens[1002], formerly of Pembrocke College, my old
acquaintance there; but formerly at Blandford schole in Dorset, where
he was usher about a yeare and by whom I reap't much information: since
schoolemaster of Buckingham; and last, of Worcester: a very good and
ingeniose person.




=Richard Stokes= (16--- 1681).


[1003]<Richard> Stokes, M.D.--his father was fellow of Eaton College
(quaere if not prebend of Windsor[1004], and if not schoolmaster of
Eaton? quaere Christopher Wase de hiis).

He was bred there and at King's College. Scholar to Mr. W. Oughtred
for Mathematiques (Algebra). He made himselfe mad with it, but became
sober again, but I feare like a crackt glasse: vide my Lives[1005], and
Surrey notes[1006]. Edidit Mr. Oughtred's 'Trigonometrie.' Became a
Roman Catholique; maried unhappily at Liege, dog and catt, etc. Became
a sott. Dyed in Newgate, prisoner for debt, ... April, 1681 (quaere Mr.
Everard diem).




=John Stowe= (1525-1605).


[1007]He was of the company of the Merchant Taylors, as by the
scutcheon of that company[1008] doeth appeare--quaere +[1009] of that
company.

St. Andrewes Undershaft, London, i.e. under, or by, the Maypole, which
was anciently called a shaft. It stood over against the west end of the
church, where now Mr. <Michael> Weekes's howse is.

His monument is in effige, sitting with a little table before him, with
a booke. He was a handsome sanguine old man. 'Tis well carved (of wood)
and painted.

On the north side of the chancel at the upper end[BS]:--

                            Memoriae Sacrum

    Resurrectionem in Christo hic expectat Johannes Stowe, Civis
    Londinensis, qui, in antiquis monumentis eruendis accuratissima
    diligentia usus, _Angliae Annales_ et _Civitatis Londini
    Synopsim_, bene de sua, bene de postera aetate meritus,
    luculenter scripsit. Vitaeque stadio pie et probe decurso,
    obiit aetatis anno 80

                          Die 5 Aprilis 1605.

    Elizabetha conjux, ut perpetuum sui amoris testimonium, dolens
    ...

[1010]Sir William Dugdale told me that speakeing of ... Stowe to
Sir Henry Spelman, Sir Henry told him that he had 'stich't us up a
historie.' He was a taylor.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[BS] Aubrey gives a drawing of the monument. At the top are the arms
of the Merchant Tailors' Company, viz. 'argent, a royal tent between
two parliament robes gules lined ermine, on a chief azure a lion
passant guardant or.' Underneath is 'his effigies.' On the right side,
the legend _Aut scribenda agere_ over the figure of his 'Annales of
England'; on the left, the legend _Aut legenda scribere_ over the
figure of his 'Survey of London.'




=Thomas Street= (1621/2-1689).


[1011]Mr. Thomas Streete[LXXXVI.], astronomer, was borne[BT] in
Ireland, his widowe thinkes, at Castle Lyons, March the 5ᵗʰ, 1621.

[LXXXVI.] His astronomical tables are the best that ever were yet made.

Anno 1661 he printed that excellent piece of _Astronomia Carolina_,
which he dedicated to king Charles II, and also presented it well bound
to prince Rupert and the duke of Monmouth, but never had a farthing of
any of them.

Afterwards he published an Appendix to his _Astronomia Carolina_, 4to,
which makes it perfect--printed for Francis Cossinet at the Anchor and
Mariner in Tower Street, 1664.

Before this appendix he writes thus, scilicet:--

'I doe here think it fitting for once publiquely to propose unto all
the world that by the farther blessing of God on my astronomical
studies since the publication of my _Astronomia Carolina_ I can
discover and demonstrate the never yet discovered art and science of
finding ☞ the true longitude, and can make it universally practicable
at sea and land with the like ease and certainty as the latitude, and
though the failings of severall specious pretenders to this discovery
have almost perswaded the world to believe the impossibility thereof,
if those that are most concerned herein will accept of it, either
upon the same termes which them selves have already offered or other
the like just and proportionable considerations, this proposall shall
be (God willing) on my part faithfully and according to the attest
of competent judges performed; otherwise I intend not to proceed any
farther with it.

                                              'THOMAS STREETE.'

[1012]He had the true motion of the moon by which he could doe it--(he
hath finished the tables of the moon and also of Mercury, which was
never made perfect before)--but two of his familiar acquaintance tell
me that he did not committ this discovery to paper: so it is dead with
him. He made attempts to be introduced to king Charles II and also to
king James II, but courtiers would not doe it without a good gratuitie.

He was of a rough and cholerique humour. Discoursing with prince
Rupert, his highnesse affirmed something that was not according to art;
sayd Mr. Street, 'whoever affirmes that is[1013] no mathematician.' So
they would point at him afterwards at court and say 'There's the man
that huff't prince Rupert.'


<_Scripsit:_-->

[1014]Memorial verses relating to the Calendar, 4to.

Some Almanacks, for about three yeares, dedicated to Elias Ashmole,
esquire: but was not encouraged for his great paines.--He was one of
Mr. Ashmole's clarkes in the Excise office, which was his chiefest
lively-hood.

The Planetary Systeme, with a description of the house, (Mr. Morden haz
of them)--this was about 1670.

[1015]He hath left with his widowe (<who> lives in Warwick lane at
the signe of the ...) an absolute piece of Trigonometrie, plain and
spherical, in MS., more perfect than ever was yet donne, and more
cleare and demonstrated.

He dyed in Chanon-row (vulgarly Channel-rowe) at Westminster, the 17th
of August 1689, and is buried in the church yard of the new chapell
there towards the east window of the chancel, scilicet, within twenty
or 30 foot of the wall.

Hee made this following epitaph himself:--

    'Here lies the earth of one that thought some good,
    Although too few him rightly understood:
    Above the starres his heightned mind did flye,
    His hapier spirit into Eternity.'

His acquaintance talke of clubbing towards an inscription. No man
living haz deserved so well of astronomie.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[BT] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 87, is a lithographed chart for inserting a
scheme of nativity, 'sold by George Parker at the Leopard in Newgate
Street.' On it Aubrey has put the scheme for the subject of this
biography, on the calculation 'Mr. Thomas Street natus March 5ᵗʰ, 1621,
at 5ʰ 43´ 12˝ P.M., latitude 51° 46´.' Some notes about astrological
conjunctions at various times in his life follow; and the note 'maried
at 55ᵃⁿⁿ. 232ᵈⁱᵉˢ.'




=Sir Francis Stuart.=


[1016]This Sir Francis Stuart[1017] was uncle (or great uncle) to the
present dutchesse of Richmond.

He was a sea-captaine, and (I thinke) he was one summer a vice or
rere-admirall. He was a learned gentleman, and one of the club at
the Mermayd, in Fryday street, with Sir Walter Ralegh, etc., of that
sodalitie: heroes and witts of that time. Ben Jonson dedicates _The
Silent Woman_ to him.

'To the truly noble by all titles Sir Francis Stuart.

'This makes that I now number you not only in the names of favour but
the names of justice to what I write, and doe presently call you to
the exercise of the noblest and manliest vertue as coveting rather to
be freed in my fame by the authority of a judge than the credit of an
undertaker.'




=Henry Stubbe= (1631/2-1676).


[1018]Dr. Henry Stubbs, physitian at Warwick, drowned July the middest
1676, riding between Bath and Bristol. Born 1631 Febr.




=Sir John Suckling= (1608/9-1641).


[1019]Sir John Suckling[BU], knight, was the eldest son of <Sir John>
Suckling, of the Green Cloath, tempore[1020] ... (I thinke, Car. I).
His mother was the daughter of.... He was borne <Febr. 1608/9>.

I have heard Mris Bond say, that Sir John's father was but a dull
fellow (her husband, Mr. Thomas Bond, knew him): the witt came by the
mother.

Quaere Dr. Busby if he was not of Westminster schoole? he might be
about his time. I have heard Sir William Davenant say that he went to
the university of Cambridge at eleaven yeares of age, where he studied
three or four yeares (I thinke, four). By 18 he had well travelled
France and Italie, and part of Germany, and (I thinke also) of Spaine.

He returned into England an extraordinary accomplished gentleman, grew
famous at court for his readie sparkling witt which was envyed, and he
was (Sir William sayd) the bull that was bayted. He was incomparably
readie at repartyng, and his witt most sparkling when most sett-upon
and provoked.

He was the greatest gallant of his time, and the greatest gamester,
both for bowling[LXXXVII.] and cards, so that no shop-keeper would
trust him for 6_d._, as to-day, for instance, he might, by winning, be
worth 200 _li._, the next day he might not be worth half so much, or
perhaps be sometimes _minus nihilo_. Sir William (who was his intimate
friend, and loved him intirely) would say that Sir John, when he was
at his lowest ebbe in gameing, I meane when unfortunate, then would
make himselfe most glorious in apparell, and sayd that it exalted his
spirits, and that he had then best luck when he was most gallant, and
his spirits were highest.

[LXXXVII.] He was one of the best bowlers of his time in England. He
playd at cards rarely well, and did use to practise by himselfe a bed,
and there studyed how the best way of managing the cards could be. His
sisters comeing to the Peccadillo-bowling-green crying for the feare he
should loose all <their> portions.

Sir William would say that he did not much care for a lord's converse,
for they were in those dayes damnably proud and arrogant, and the
French would say that 'My lord d'Angleterre ...[1021] comme un
mastif-dog'; but now the age is more refined, and much by the example
of his gracious majestie, who is the patterne of courtesie.

Anno Domini 163- there happened, unluckily, a difference between Sir
John Suckling and Sir John Digby (brother to Sir Kenelme) about a
mistresse or gameing, I have now forgott. Sir John was but a slight
timberd man, and of midling stature; Sir John Digby a proper person
of great strength, and courage answerable, and yielded to be the best
swordman of his time. Sir John, with some 2 or 3 of his party assaults
Sir John Digby goeing into a play-house; Sir J. D. had only his lacquey
with him, but he[1022] flew on them like a tigre, and made them run.
'Twas pitty that this accident brought the blemish of cowardise to such
an ingeniose young sparke. Sir J. D. was such a hero that there were
very few but he would have served in the like manner.

Anno Domini 163- when the expedition was into Scotland, Sir John
Suckling, at his owne chardge, raysed a troope of 100 very handsome
young proper men, whom he clad in white doubletts and scarlett
breeches, and scarlet coates, hatts, and ... feathers, well horsed,
and armed. They say 'twas one of the finest sights in those dayes. But
Sir John Menis made a lampoon[BV] of it (vide the old collection of
lampoons):

    'The ladies opened the windows to see
    So fine and goodly a sight-a,' &c.

I thinke the lampoon sayes he made an inglorious chardge against the
Scotts.

Quaere in what army he was in the Civill Warres.

[1023]Anno ... he went into France, where after some time being come to
the bottome of his fund that was left, reflecting on the miserable and
despicable condition he should be reduced to, having nothing left to
maintaine him, he (having a convenience for that purpose, lyeing at an
apothecarie's house, in Paris) tooke poyson, which killed him miserably
with vomiting. He was buryed in the Protestants church-yard. This was
(to the best of my remembrance) 1646.

His picture, which is like him, before his Poems, says that he was but
28 yeares old when he dyed.

He was of middle stature and slight strength, brisque round eie,
reddish fac't and red nose (ill liver), his head not very big, his
hayre a kind of sand colour; his beard turnd-up naturally, so that he
had brisk and gracefull looke. He died a batchelour.

Memorandum:--he made a magnificent entertainment in London, at ...,
for a great number of ladies of quality, all beauties and young, which
cost him ... hundreds of poundes, where were all the rarities that this
part of the world could afford, and the last service of all was silke
stockings and garters, and I thinke also gloves.

Anno Domini 1637 Sir John Suckling, William Davenant, poet laureat (not
then knighted), and Jack Young came to the Bathe. Sir John came like
a young prince for all manner of equipage and convenience, and Sir W.
Davenant told me that he had a cart-load of bookes carried downe,
and 'twas there, at Bath, that he writt the little tract in his booke
about Socinianism. 'Twas as pleasant a journey as ever men had; in the
heighth of a long peace and luxury, and in the venison season. The
second night they lay at Marlborough, and walking on the delicate fine
downes at the backside of the towne, whilest supper was making ready,
the maydes were drying of cloathes on the bushes. Jack Young had espied
a very pretty young girle, and had gott her consent for an assignation,
which was about midnight, which they happened to overheare on the other
side of the hedge, and were resolved to frustrate his designe. They
were wont every night to play at cards after supper a good while; but
Jack Young pretended wearinesse, etc. and must needes goe to bed, not
to be perswaded by any meanes to the contrary. They had their landlady
at supper with them; said they to her, 'Observe this poor gentleman
how he yawnes, now is his mad fit comeing uppon him. We beseech you
that you make fast his dores, and gett somebody to watch and looke to
him, for about midnight he will fall to be most outragious: gett the
hostler, or some strong fellow, to stay-up, and we will well content
him, for he is our worthy friend, and a very honest gentleman, only,
perhaps, twice in a yeare he falls into these fitts.' Jack Young slept
not, but was ready to goe out as the clock struck to the houre of
appointment, and then goeing to open the dore he was disappointed,
knocks, bounces, stampes, calls, 'Tapster! Chamberlayne! Hostler!'
sweares and curses dreadfully; nobody would come to him. Sir John
and W. Davenant were expectant all this time, and ready to dye with
laughter. I know not how he happened to gett-open the dore, and was
comeing downe stayres. The hostler, a huge lusty fellow, fell upon him,
and held him, and cryed, 'Good sir, take God in your mind, you shall
not goe out to destroy your selfe.' J. Young struggled and strived,
insomuch that at last he was quite spent and dispirited, and faine to
goe to bed to rest himselfe. In the morning the landlady of the house
came to see how he did, and brought him a cawdle. 'Oh sir,' sayd she,
'you had a heavy fitt last night, pray, sir, be pleased to take some
of this to comfort your heart.' Jack Young thought the woman had been
mad, and being exceedingly vexed, flirted the porrenger of cawdle in
her face. The next day his camerades told him all the plott, how they
crosse-bitt him. That night they went to Bronham-house, Sir Edward
Baynton's (then a noble seat, since burnt in the civill warres), where
they were nobly entertained severall dayes. From thence, they went to
West Kington, to parson ... Davenant, Sir William's eldest brother,
where they stayd a weeke--mirth, witt, and good cheer flowing. From
thence to Bath, six or seven miles.

Memorandum:--parson Robert Davenant haz told me that that tract about
Socinianisme was writt on the table in the parlour of the parsonage at
West Kington.

[1024]My lady Southcot, whose husband hanged himselfe, was Sir John
Suckling's sister, to whom he writes a consolatory letter, viz.
the first. She afterwards maried ... Corbet, D.D., of Merton Coll.
Oxon[BW]. At her house in Bishop's Gate-street, London, is an originall
of her brother, Sir John, of Sir Anthony van-Dyke, all at length,
leaning against a rock, with a play[1025]-booke, contemplating. It is a
piece of great value. There is also another rare picture, viz. of that
pretty creature, Mris Jane Shore, an originall.

When his _Aglaura_ was <acted>, he bought all the cloathes himselfe,
which were very rich; no tinsill, all the lace pure gold and silver,
which cost him ... I have now forgott. He had some scaenes to it, which
in those dayes were only used at masques.

Memorandum:--Mr. Snowdon tells me, that after Sir John's unluckie
rencounter, or quarrell, with Sir John Digby, wherin he was baffled:
'twas strange to see the envie and ill nature of people to trample,
and scoffe at, and deject one in disgrace; inhumane as well as
un-christian. The lady ... Moray (quaere) had made an entertainment
for severall persons of quality at Ashley (in Surrey, near Chertsey),
whereat Mr. Snowdon then was. There was the countesse of Middlesex,
whom Sir John had highly courted, and had spent on her, and in treating
her, some thousand of pounds. At this entertainment she could not
forbeare, but was so severe and ingrate as to upbraid Sir John of his
late recieved baffle; and some other ladys had their flirts. The lady
Moray (who invited them) seing Sir John out of countenance, for whose
worth she alwaies had a respect: 'Well[1026],' sayd shee, 'I am a merry
wench, and will never forsake an old friend in disgrace, so <co>me sitt
downe by me, Sir John' (said she), and seated him on her right hand,
and countenanced him. This raysed Sir John's dejected spirites that
he threw his reparties about the table with so much sparklingness and
gentilenes of witt, to the admiration of them all.

[1027]Sir John Suckling--from Mr. William Beeston--invented the game
of cribbidge. He sent his cards to all gameing places in the country,
which were marked with private markes of his: he gott 20,000 _li._ by
this way. Sir Francis Cornwallis made _Aglaura_, except the end.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[BU] Aubrey gives in trick the coat:--'parted per pale gules and
argent, 3 bucks or; a crescent for difference,' wreathing it in laurel.
On this he notes: (_a_) 'This coat was in his banner when he went into
Scotland'; (_b_) 'Suckling of Wotton in Norfolke'; (_c_) 'vide Heralds'
Office'; (_d_) 'Memorandum:--this Sir John <Suckling> is not to be
found in the <Heralds'> Office: quaere Sir ... Bourman of White Hall.'
Dr. Philip Bliss has added also the reference: 'vide part iii, pag.
4b,' i.e. MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 10ᵛ, the passage given _supra_.

[BV] In the letter in which Aubrey speaks of writing this life (_supra_
i. p. 2: MS. Ballard 14, fol. 131) he says:--'I want the scoffing
ballad that Sir John Menis made against him, upon his fine troope
and his running away. To which Sir John Suckling replyed in another
ballad:--

    "I prithee, foole, who ere thou bee,
    That madest this fine sing-song of mee
    ... a sott
    ... or els some rebell Scott."

Pray, search Mr. <Ralph> Sheldon's ballad collections for them.'

[BW] Anthony Wood objects here: 'Dr. Corbet married Sir Nathaniel
Brent's daughter': see Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, i. 235.




=Thomas Sutton= (1532-1611).


[1028]... Sutton, founder of the Hospitall[1029]--from old Thomas
Tyndale, esq., the father--was first a garrison-soldier at
Barwick[1030]. He was a lusty healthy handsome fellowe, and there
was a very rich brewer who brewed to the navy, etc., who was ancient
and he had maried a young buxome wife.... The old brewer doted on
his desirable wife and dies and left her all his estate which was
great[1031].

Sutton was a man of good understanding, and improved it[1032] admirably
well, but the particular wayes by which he did it I have now forgot;
but he was much upon mortgages, and fed severall with hopes of being
his heire.

'Twas from him that B. Johnson tooke his hint of the fox, and by
Seigneur Volpone is meant Sutton.

The later end of his dayes he lived in Fleetstreet at a wollendraper's
shop opposite to Fetterlane, where he had so many great chests full of
money that his chamber was ready to groane under it; and Mr. Tyndale,
who knew him and I thinke had money of him on mortgage during his
lawe-suite (vide the lord Stafford's case in Coke's Reports), was
afrayd the roome would fall. He lived to establish his hospitall, and
was governor there himselfe. Obiit....

The earle of Dorset (I thinke, Richard) mightily courted him and
presented[1033] him, hoping to have been his heire; and so did severall
other great persons.

Vide his life in 4to.




=William Sutton= (1562-1632).


[1034]Mr. William Sutton came to Ch. Ch. Oxon at eleaven. He wrote
much, but printed nothing but a little 8vo against the Papists.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

The Matric. Reg. does not bear out the statement as to his age: he
appears there as matriculating Nov. 20, 1580, aged 18. He _may_ have
previously been chorister. He was elected Student of Ch. Ch. in 1579;
took B.D. in 1592; and was Aubrey's schoolmaster at Blandford St.
Mary's, Dorsetshire, where he was rector from 1592 till his death.




=Sir Philip Sydney= (1554-1586).


[1035]Sir[1036] Philip Sydney, natus 29 November, 1554, 19ʰ 50´ P.M.,
Cantiae, polo 51° 52´; ex MSS. Eliae Ashmole[1037], armigeri.

[1038]Sir Philip Sydney[BX], knight, was the most accomplished cavalier
of his time. He was the eldest son of the right honourable Sir Henry
Sydney, knight of the noble order of the Garter, Lord President of
Wales, and Lord Deputie of Ireland, 1570. I suppose he was borne at
Penshurst in Kent (neer Tunbridge); vide.

He had the best tutors provided for him by his father that could then
be had, as ... Vide my Grammar[BY] notes.

He travelled France, Italie, Germany; he was in the Poland warres,
and at that time he had to his page[LXXXVIII.] (and as an excellent
accomplishment) Henry Danvers (afterwards earle of Danby), then second
son of Sir John Danvers of Dantesey in Wilts, who accounted himselfe
happy that his son was so bestowed. He makes mention, in his Art of
Poesie, of his being in Hungarie (I remember).

[LXXXVIII.] This my cosen Elizabeth Danvers, now viscountesse Purbec,
his niece, has told.

He was not only of an excellent witt, but extremely beautifull; he
much resembled his sister, but his haire was not red, but a little
inclining, viz. a darke amber colour. If I were to find a fault in it,
methinkes 'tis not masculine enough; yett he was a person of great
courage. He was much at Wilton with his sister, and at Ivy-church[1039]
(which adjoyns to the parke pale of Clarindon Parke), situated on a
hill that overlookes all the country westwards, and north over Sarum
and the plaines, and into that delicious parke (which was accounted
the best of England) eastwards. It was heretofore a monastery (the
cloysters remayne still); 'twas called coenobium Edrosium. My great
uncle, Mr. Thomas Browne, remembred him; and sayd that he was often
wont, as he was hunting on our pleasant plaines, to take his table
booke out of his pocket, and write downe his notions as they came into
his head, when he was writing his Arcadia, (which was never finished by
him).

He was the reviver of poetry in those darke times, which was then at a
very low ebbe,--e.g. 'The Pleasant Comoedie of Jacob and Esau,' acted
before King Henry VIII's grace (where, I remember, is this expression,
that _the pottage was so good, that God Almighty might have putt his
finger in't_); 'Grammar Gurton's Needle'; and in these playes there is
not 3 lines but there is 'by God,' or 'by God's wounds.'

He was of a very munificent spirit, and liberall to all lovers of
learning, and to those that pretended to any acquaintance with
Parnassus; in so much that he was cloyd and surfeited with the
poetasters of those dayes. Among others[1040] Mr. Edmund Spencer[1041]
made his addresse to him, and brought his _Faery Queen_. Sir Philip was
busy at his study, and his servant delivered[1042] Mr. Spencer's booke
to his master, who layd it by, thinking it might be such kind of stuffe
as he was frequently troubled with. Mr. Spencer stayd so long that his
patience was wearied, and went his way discontented, and never intended
to come again. When Sir Philip perused it, he was so exceedingly
delighted with it, that he was extremely sorry he was gonne, and
where to send for him he knew not. After much enquiry he learned his
lodgeing, and sent for him, mightily caressed <him>, and ordered his
servant to give him ... pounds in gold. His servant sayd that that was
too much; 'No,' said Sir Philip, 'he is ...,' and ordered an addition.

From this time there was a great friendship between them, to his dying
day.

I have heard Dr. Pell say, that he haz been told by ancient gentlemen
of those dayes of Sir Philip, so famous for men at armes, that 'twas
then held as great a disgrace for a young gentleman[1043] to be seen
riding in the street in a coach, as it would now for such a one to be
seen in the streetes in a petticoate and wastcoate; so much is the
fashion of the times nowe altered.

He maried the daughter of Sir Francis Walsingham, Principall Secretary
of Estate (I thinke his only child--quaere), whom he loved very well....

Having recieved some shott or wound in the warres in the
Lowe-countreys, where he had command of ... (the Ramikins, I
thinke), he <acted> contrary to the injunction of his physitians and
chirurgions, which cost him his life: upon which occasion there were
some roguish verses made.

His body was putt in a leaden coffin (which, after the firing of
Paule's, I myselfe sawe), and with wonderfull greate state was carried
from ... to St. Paule's church, where he was buried in our Ladie's
Chapell: vide Sir William Dugdale's _Paul's_, and epitaph. There
solempnized this funerall all the nobility and great officers of Court;
all the Judges and Serjeants at Lawe; all the soldiers, and commanders,
and gentry that were in London; the Lord Mayer, and Aldermen, and
Livery-men. His body was borne on men's shoulders (perhaps 'twas a
false coffin).

When I was a boy 9 yeares old, I was with my father at one Mr.
Singleton's, an alderman and wollen-draper in Glocester, who had in
his parlour, over the chimney, the whole description of the funerall,
engraved and printed on papers pasted[1044] together, which, at length,
was, I beleeve, the length of the room at least; but he had contrived
it to be turned upon two pinnes, that turning one of them made the
figures march all in order. It did make such a strong impression on my
young[1045] phantasy, that I remember it as if it were but yesterday.
I could never see it elswhere. The house is in the great long street,
over against[1046] the high steeple; and 'tis likely it remaines there
still. 'Tis pitty it is not re-donne.

In St. Mary's church at Warwick is a sumptuose monument of the lord
Brooke, round a great altar of black marble is only this inscription:--

'Here lies the body of Sir Fulke Grevill, knight, servant to Q.
Elizabeth, counsellor to K. James, and friend to Sir Philip Sydney.'

On a little tablet of wood:--

    'England, Netherlands, the Heavens and the Arts
    Of ... Sydney hath made ... parts;
    ... for who could suppose,
    That one heape of stones could Sydney enclose.'

 [1047]Sir Henry Sydney, knight of  _m._  Mary, daughter of John Dudley,
       the Garter, and President of  |    duke of Northumberland, sister
       Wales.                        |    to Ambrose, earle of Warwick.
                                     |
         +---------------------------+--+------------+-------+-----+---+
         |                              |            |       |     |   |
  1. Sir Philip _m._ ... daughter  2. Robert,  3. Thomas.  Mary.   \---/
     Sydney      |   and ... of       viscount                  two sisters,
                 |   secretary        Lisle,                    married to
                 |   Walsingham:      1616.                     2 Mansells of
                 |   obiit 22 Sept.                             Glamorganshire,
                 |   1586.                                      brothers.
                 |
             Elizabeth, daughter  _m._  Roger Manners, earl
             and heir              |     of Rutland.
                                   |
                               sine prole.


[1048]_Key of Pembroke's Arcadia[BZ]._

  Sir,

All the good bodies thanke you for your remembrance, which I ought to
have told you sooner if a paine in my head had not hinderd me.

I wishe I could give you the key you desire, but all I know of it is
not worth anything; though conversant amongst his relations, could
learne noe more then Pamela's being my lady Northumberland[1049],
Philo[clea] my lady Rich[1050], two sisters, the last beloved by him,
upon whose account he made his _Astrophell and Stella_; Miso, lady
Cox, Mopse, lady Lucy, persons altogether unknowne now; Musid[orus] and
Pericles, the two ladies' husbands. Lord Ri[ch] being then his friend,
he perswaded her mother to the match, though he repented afterwards:
she then very young and secretly in love with him but he no consern for
her. Her beauty augmenting, he sayes in his _Astrophel and Stella_,
he didnt think 'the morn would have proved soe faire a daye.' Their
mother[1051] was beautifull and gallant (whether he meant Ginesia by
her or noe, I know not); but their father died, they being young. She
remaried to Dudley, Leycester and Northumberland, and afterwards to
her gentleman of the horse, Sir Cristopher Blunt, which was beheaded
with lord Essex. It was thought he meant himself by Amphi[alus] and
his lady, Sir Francis Walsingham's daughter and heire, the queen of
Corinth. If he did make his owne character high, they sayd Philisides
was himself to, but it was all a guesse. He made it young, and diyng
desired his folies might be burnt.

Some others I have heard guessed at, but have forgot. Therfore canot
satisfie the lady, which I would for your sake.

I give you thankes but shall not want my grandmother's epitaph (which
was for a relation of ours heere, who desird it), having found it of
your giving.

I knew of my brother's place, but know nothing of his mariyng yett.

My service to your brother. I am sorry all thinges should not answear
both your desires.

You have perfectly the good wishes of,

                                                   Your humble servant,
                                                     D. TYNDALE.

  [Langton[1052] in Lincolneshire]
        Feb. 18, 1686/7.

Service to my lady Long. Whye doe you tell us no newes? Does not Mrs.
Mason's mar[1053]....


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[BX] Aubrey gives in trick the coat, 'or, a pheon vert [Sydney],'
wreathed in laurel (as is his custom for a poet). Dr. Philip Bliss has
added the reference 'See part iii ante p. 24 for his birth,' i.e. the
horoscope in MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 41ᵛ--_ut supra_ p. 247.

[BY] MS. Aubr. 22: see vol. i. p. 123.

[BZ] This is the title given by Aubrey to D. Tyndale's letter.
The letter is inserted between foll. 81, 82 of MS. Aubr. 6. It is
addressed--'ffor Mr. John Aubry, to be left at Mr. Hooke's lodging in
Gresham Coledge, p. postpᵈ.'




=Sir Robert Talbot= (1641/2-1681).


[1054]Sir Robert Talbot natus 1641/2, Friday, January 21, 14ʰ 0´ 14˝
P.M.

Sent by King Charles 2ᵈ into France to cure Madamosille d'Orleans, May
last, 1678.

Oct. 1678, knighted.

A second voyage into France, being sent for by that king, Decʳ. 1678.

Married February 1678/9.

He dyed about September 1681.

[1055]Sir Robert Talbot, ague doctor, natus 21 Januarii 1641/2, 14ʰ 0´
14˝ P.M.




=John Tap.=


[1056]... Tappe:--he writ a very good Arithmetique for those times,
with an introduction to Algebra, in English, in 8vo.




=John Taylor= (1580-1654).


[1057]John Tayler, the water-poet:--his Workes are a fair folio,
printed, London, 1630.

<He> was borne in the citie of Glocester:--.... Tayler, a painter, was
his brother[1058], who told me thus 23 yeares since (he lives yet at
Oxon): and his picture hung in the Schooles gallery.

He came to London and bound himselfe to a water-man, in which capacity
he wrote his poems. I have heard Josias Howe, M.A., say that he will
choose out 6 verses (quaere) there as good as you will find in any
other.

He was very facetious and diverting company; and for stories and lively
telling them, few could out-doe him.

Anno 1643, at the Act time, I sawe him at Oxon. I guesse he was then
neer 50. I remember he was of middle stature, had a good quick looke, a
black velvet, a plush-gippe and silver shoulder-belt; was much made of
by the scholars, and was often with Josias Howe at Trinity College.

He had heretofore in the long peace severall figgaries, e.g. he came
from London to Salisbury in his skuller. He went so to Calais. He went
to Scotland (I think round Great Britaine) _littus legens_ in his
skuller.

Ever since the begining of the civill warres he lived in
Turne-stile-alley in Long Acre, about[1059] the middle on the east side
over against the Goate (now[1060]), where he sold ale. His conversation
was incomparable for three or four mornings' draughts. But afterwards
you were entertained with _crambe bis cocta_. His signe was his owne
head, and very like him, which about 22 yeares since was removed to
the alehowse, the corner howse opposite to Clarendon howse. Under his
picture are these verses; on one side:--

    There's many a head stands for a signe.
    Then, gentle reader, why not mine?

On the other:--

    Though I deserve not, I desire
    The laurell wreath, the poet's hire.

This picture is now almost worne out.

Obiit ... (about 25 years since): sepult. in the church-yard of St.
Martin's-in-the-fields.

[1061]John Taylor, water poet, quaere his _obiit_. Quaere his brother
the paynter at Oxon. A<nthony> W<ood> respondet that he haz notes from
the paynter who is dead.




=Silas Taylor= (1624-1678).


[1062]Mr. Baker, the printseller, by the Royal Exchange, hath a MS., a
thin folio, viz. the description of Harwich and all its appurtenances
and antiquities by capt. Silas Tayler.

[1063]Captain Silas Tayler: vide A. Wood's _Hist. et Antiq. Oxon._ He
was a captaine in the Parliament army, under col. <Edward> Massey. He
was a sequestrator, in Herefordshire, and had, in those times, great
power, which power he used civilly and obligeingly, that he was beloved
by all the King's party.

He was very musicall, and hath composed many things, and I have heard
anthemes of his sang before his majestie, in his chapell, and the king
told him he liked them. He had a very fine chamber organ in those
unmusicall dayes. There was a great friendship between Matthew Lock,
since organist of the Queen's chapell, and him[LXXXIX.].

[LXXXIX.] M. Lock maryed Mr. Garnon's daughter, in Herefordshire.

His father left him a pretty good estate, but he bought church lands
and had the moeity of the bishop's palace, at Hereford, where he layd
out much money in building and altering. Col. John Burch[1064] had the
other moeity.

The times turning, he was faine to disgorge all he had gott, and was
ruined, but Sir Paul Neile got for him the keeper of the King's stores
at Harwich, worth about C_li._ per annum.

He was a great lover of antiquities, and ransackt the MSS. of the
Church of Hereford (there were a great many that lay uncouth and
unkiss).

He also garbled the library of the church of Worcester, and evidences,
where he had the originall grant of King Edgar (θαλασσιαρχης) whence
the Kings of England derive their right to the soveraignty of the
sea. 'Tis printed in Mr. Selden's _Mare Clausum_. I have seen it many
times, and it is as legible as but lately written (Roman character).
He offered it to the king for 120_li._ but his majesty would not give
so much. Since his death, I acquainted the Secretary of Estate that he
dyed in debt, and his creditors seised on his goods and papers. He told
me that it did of right belong to Worcester Church. I told one of their
prebends, and they cared not for such things. I beleeve it haz wrapt
herings by this time.

He had severall MSS. by him of great antiquity: one thin 4to. of the
Philosopher's Stone, in Hieroglyphicks, with some few Latin verses
underneath; the most curiously limned that ever I sawe. His Majesty
offered him 100_li._ for it, and he would not accept it. Tell Dr.
Crowder[1065] of the deed of king Edgar.

Memorandum:--Capt. Tayler search<ed> the Records in the Tower, etc.,
and retrived some privileges that the borough[1066] had lost, for which
the borough ought ever to have his remembrance in esteeme: and tho' he
dyed above 100_li._ in their debt, yet the towne lost not by him, for
the reason aforesaid.

The history or collection of this ancient borough he pawned a little
before his death to Mr. Baker, the printseller by the Old Exchange, for
4_li._ 15_s._ I acquainted Sir Philip Parker, whom the borough uses to
choose for their burghesse, to buy it for his borough. He would not
lay out so much money, which would doe them more service then all his
roast-beefe, wine, and ale at an election.

_Digitus Dei[1067]._ All that family came to unfortunate ends. His
eldest sonne, wife, and children, were all burnt in their beds
in ... near Lothbury; another son, ...; another son (a dragoon[1068]),
a churchyard wall fell on him and killed him.

[1069]He surveyed very ingeniously and carefully the antiquities of
Herefordshire, scil. about 3/4 of the county, before the restauration
of his majesty. He then left the country and went to his friend,
Sir Edward Harley, then governour of Dunkirke, who gave him some
command.--These papers[1070] are in the hands of Sir Edward Harley at
Brampton-Bryan Castle.

[1071]Silas Domville _alias_ Taylor, comitatus Salopiensis, xviᵗᵒ
die mensis Julii anno Domini MDCXXIVᵗᵒ in Harleya natus: in scholis
Westmonasteriensi, Salopiensi (Scrobesbyriensi, si placeat), et aliis
alumnatus: in tabulis publicis Aulae Novi Hospitii Oxoniensis circa
annum MDCXLI conscriptus erat. Anno MDCLX apparatus bellici, armorum,
et munimentorum rerum nauticarum Harvici in extrema maritima parte
Essexiae pro serenissimo rege Carolo secundo usque adhuc ab anno MDCLXV
custos et agens.

Inter alios libros scripsit de terrarum partitione inter liberos
secundum tenuram Wallensium, Anglicé the History of Gavel kind, et ad
finem ejusdem historiolam quandam ducum Normannorum tempore Henrici
primi Latiné scriptam divulgavit, quae vocatur Brevis relatio.... In
historia et descriptione comitatus Herefordiensis per quadriennium,
immo vero lustrum, enixe laboravit sed nec absolute aut ad plenum
perfecit.

[1072]For what other bookes, besides Gavel-kind, I have wrote, as my
name for cogent reasons when first printed was not to them because of
the nature of them, soe I shall not be soe vaine as now, after soe long
a sleep, to awaken them with it.




=Herbert Thorndyke= (16--- 1672).


[1073]Mr. Herbert Thorndyke was borne at ... in Lincolnshire, went to
schoole at ... (quaere if at Westminster); ..., was fellow of Trinity
College in Cambridge; afterwards prebendary of Westminster[1074].

He was a good poet. I have seen a _poemation_ of his on the death of
Gustavus Adolphus, king of Sweden, in Latin hexameters, about 100
verses or better.

He was (as I am enformed by Seth Ward, Lord Bishop of Sarum, and other
learned men) one of the best scholars and mathematicians of this age.

He printed ... but he does not write clearly (quaere Dr. Pell de hoc).

Richard Busby, schoolmaster of Westminster, has his MSS.; quaere what
they are.

He dyed[1075] <July>, 167<2>; and lies interred in the north-east angle
of Westminster cloysters, next to the grave-stone of <Thomas> Nurse,
M.D., a piece of a blew marble stone on him but yet no inscription.

He made his own inscription which is mentioned by Mr. Andrew Marvell in
his _Rehearsall Transpros'd_, viz.:--

    Hic jacet corpus Herberti Thorndike
    praebendarii hujus ecclesiae, qui vivus
        veram Reformatae Ecclesiae
        rationem et modum precibus
        studiisque persequebatur.
    Tu, Lector, requiem et beatam
    in Christo resurrectionem precare.

A parallel written by the bishop[1076] and found under his owne hand
and appointed for his epitaph, but I heare that Dr. <William> Lloyd his
successor will have it altered to avoyd offence:--

              Exuviae[1077] Isaaci, Asaphensis episcopi,
                      In manus Domini depositae,
                     In spem laetae resurrectionis
                       per sola Christi merita.
              O vos transeuntes[1078] domum[1079] Domini,
                           Domum orationis,
                       Orate pro conservo vestro
                 Ut inveniam misericordiam die Domini.
                            June 30, 1680.




=John Tombes= (1603-1676).


[1080]Mr. John Tombs, B.D. (quaere A. Wood's _Antiq. Oxon._) was borne
at Beaudley in Worcestershire; his father was a....

Anno Domini <1617/8> he was admitted at Magdalen-hall, in Oxon. Anno
<1621>, A.B.; Anno <1624>, A.M. He read to pupills, and was tutor there
to John Wilkins, afterwards bishop of Chester. He was a great master
of the Greeke tongue, and the Hebrue he understood well. He alwaies
carried a little Greeke Testament about with him; he had <it> almost
memoriter. He was an admirable disputant; I remember he was wont to
say, that to be a good disputant, 'tis requisite for one to be a good
grammarian, as well as logician. I have forgott if he was pupill to the
learned Mr. <William> Pemble; but his favourite he was. He was soon
taken notice of for his curious searching, piercing witt: he preached
somewhere eastwards from Oxon, and had a company[1081] followed him;
and 'twas predicted he would doe a great deale of mischiefe to the
Church of England, reflecting upon what ... sayes, that the greatest
witts have donne the most mischiefe to the Church, introducing new
opinions, etc. Anno ... he was vicar of a market-towne[1082] in
Herefordshire, where he was very well beloved by his parish, and
Sir ... Croftes, eldest brother to the now bishop of Hereford, built a
house in Leominster, to live there, to heare him preach. Anno ... he
writt ..., 8vo, dedicated to John Scudamore, viscount Slego, baron
of ... drum[1083]. Anno 1645, 1646, he was master of the Temple
at London, i.e. minister. In 1647 he was supplanted there by
parson Johnson. Then he went into his owne country, to Beaudley (a
market-towne), at which time Mr. Baxter (his antagonist) preacht at
Kitterminster, the next market-towne, two miles distant. They preacht
against one another's doctrines, and printed against each other. Mr.
Tombes was the Coryphæus of the Anabaptists: both had great[1084]
audience; they went severall miles on foot to each doctor. Once (I
thinke oftner), they disputed face to face, anno ...; and the followers
were like two armies, about 1500 of a party; and truly, at last they
fell by the eares, hurt was donne, and the civill magistrate had much
adoe to quiet them. About anno 1664 he came to the Act at Oxford
(quaere), and did there _in vesperiis_ sett up a challenge to maintaine
_contra omnes gentes_ the Anabaptisticall doctrine; but not a man would
grapple with him. Now, though _primâ facie_ this might seeme very bold
to challenge a whole University, 'twas not so very strange neither, for
he came throughly prepared, after 30 yeares' study and thoughts, and
most of them surprised.

_Scripsit_....

Dr. <Robert> Sanderson, lord bishop of Lincolne, and he, had a greate
esteeme for each other, so also had Dr. <Thomas> Barlowe (now bishop
there). Putting aside his Anabaptisticall positions, he was comformable
enough to the Church of England. About 1658 or 9, he maried the widowe
of ... Dove, of Salisbury, and went to hear the Common Prayer there,
and recieved the Sacraments; and sometimes wayted on bishop Ward, who
respected him for his learning. He was thought to be as great a divine
as most we had after bishop Sanderson dyed. I remember he never, or
seldome, was wont to say Our Saviour Christ, but _My Lord Christ_.
He seemed to be a very pious and zealous Christian. I have heard him
say (though he was much opposite to the Romish religion) that truly,
for his part, should he see a poor zealous friar goeing to preach, he
should pay[1085] him respect. He was but a little man, neat limbed,
a little quick searching eie, sad, gray. He dyed at Salisbury, May
22, and was buried 25th, in St. Edmund's church-yard, anno Domini
1676, opposite to the steeple, a good distance on the north side. His
daughter dyed 7 yeares before him, and haz a grave-stone on her, with
an inscription. He lyes there, and in the same stone is since engraven
an inscription to the purpose already written of Mr. John Tombes.

  [1086]Deare Sir[CA],

According to your desire I have sent you (although long, for it),
my cozen Gore and my cozen Gastrell's nativityes; also your brother
William who is now in this countrey desired mee to send you up Mr.
Francis Potter's place of interment in the church at Killmanton, and
the inscriptions on Mr. Tombs' and his daughter's tombston.

I have enquired of Mr. Kent; and hee sayth that Mr. Potter is buryed in
Killmanton church, but in what part of the church hee knoweth not.

The inscription on Mr. Tombes his tomb is first:--

'Here lyeth the body of Elizabeth the wife of Mr. Wolston Abbott,'

and under itt this inscription on the same stone:--

'Here <lyeth> the body of Mr. John Tombes, Batchelour in Divinity, a
constant preacher of God's word, who deceased the 22ᵈ of May 1676, aged
73.'

I will finish Mr. Penruduck's[CB] genesis as soone as I can; but I am
somewhat bussy att present; therefore must begge his pardon.

I will write to H. Coley shortly, for lately I received a letter from
him.

Soe in hast I am, Sir,

                                Your faythfull servant to bee commanded,
                                                 CHARLES SNELL.

[Sidenote:

  Sarum;
    Saturday,
      2ᵈᵒ Aprilis 1618.]

Yesterday the good lord bishop of Sarum arrived att his pallace in the
Close.

[1087]To John Aubrey, esq., att Mr. Hooke's chamber in Gresham Colledge
with care these present.

                                                                 London.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[CA] This letter from Charles Snell to Aubrey is sealed with the
following coat:--'... a cross pattée crossed; quartering, ... 3 roses
on a fess between 6 martlets.'

Aubrey has on it a jotting 'Memorandum his life as to Dove,' and in MS.
Aubr. 8, fol. 15, the note 'Mr. ... Tombes: mend the mistake of ...
Dove's widdowe,' i.e. _supra_, p. 259, correct the statement that 'he
maried the widowe of ... Dove.' He married the widow of Wolston Abbott
of Salisbury: Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 360: July 14, 1681.

[CB] George Penruddock, of Broad Chalk, born at Westminster.--MS. Aubr.
23, fol. 61.




=Ezreel Tonge= (1621-1680).


[1088]Ezreel Tong[CC], D.D., was borne at Tickell, in Yorkshire,
between Bautre and Doncaster.

Obiit ... Decemb., sepultus 23 Decemb. <1680> in the vault of
the church-yard of St. Mary Stayning, London; where, before the
conflagration, was a church, of which he was the parson[1089]; but I
have heard his brother, captain Tong (of the King's Guards) say 'twas
worth but 18 _li._ per annum, for he had gathered it.

Mr. <Thomas> Jones (who preached his funerall sermon: printed) sayes
that he haz left two tomes in folio of alchymie. His excellency lay
_there_.

About 1658, or 1659, the then-Power made an Academie of the Bishop's
Pallace at Durham, for the benefit of the North. Dr. Tonge was the
governour, or one of the professors. Ned Bagshawe was proposed to have
been another. The Dr. had an excellent schoole there, and followed
precisely the Jesuites' method of teaching; and boyes did profit
wonderfully, as needes they must, by that method.

He afterwards taught at Islington, at Sir Thomas Fisher's house[CD],
where was a long gallery, and he had severall printed heads of Caesars,
&c.; verbes under such a head, governed a dative case; under another,
an ablative. The boyes had it as readie as could be. I have been there.

[1090]Ezerel Tong, D.D.:--Mr. Cadnam, bookeseller, New Exchange, hath
his papers, among which is a MS. (folio) of chymistrie: quaere title.
Respondet quod non: Captain Tonge (his brother) gave all his papers to
my lord Culpepper[1091], when he went to Virginia. I spake to Sir R.
Reding to quaere <about them>, and my lord heeded not such things. So
there is a precious collection of other men's labours lost.

[1092]Ezerel Tong, D.D., invented (among other things) the way of
teaching children to write a good hand in twenty dayes' time, by
writing over, with black inke, copies printed from copper-plates in
red inke:--viz., the children (scilicet, about 8 or 9 aetatis) were
to do it four howers in the day; i.e. 2 howers or 2 halfe-howers in
the morning at a time (as the boyes' temper could endure it, without
tyring him); and then to play as long; and then to it again, to
keep up the idea in the child fresh. Since his death, Mr. Robert
Moray (projector[1093] of the Penney Post) haz engraven severall
plates printed-off in red letters, by which meanes boyes learne (to
admiration) as aforesayd--quod N.B.

His funerall sermon was preached in the church of St. Michael,
Wood-street; the church of St. Mary Stayning being burn't, and never to
be re-edified, but both parishes putt together.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[CC] Aubrey gives in trick the coat, 'azure, a bend or cottised argent,
between six martlets or,' and notes 'this is the same coat that is
borne by Delabere.'

[CD] MS. Aubr. 22 is a collection of short treatises, chiefly on
Latin grammar. Of this Aubrey says:--'Memorandum:--this collection of
grammatical learning (and another in 8vo) is in relation to my idea of
the education of the noblesse,' i.e. is in preparation for MS. Aubr. 10
_infra_.--In this volume is a treatise 'by Dr. Tonge, Brampton Castle,
Dec. 23, 1672,' entitled 'Dr. Tonge _de punctis_,' 3 pp., dealing with
Wasmuth's rules for punctuation.

Also, _An epitome of Grammar_, by Ezerel Tonge, D.D., being 18 memorial
verses, beginning

             'Eight parts, two numbers, six cases, these.'

Also, a prospectus of Tong's school, 'At Islington in or near Sir
Richard Fisher's house, next the church, having a prospect into Canbury
fields'; and on the back of it a scheme of the terminations in the
declension of Latin nouns. Also, 4 pp. of memorial verses (Latin), and
(in MS.) a scheme for the conjugation of verbs.

MS. Aubr. 10 is Aubrey's 'The idea of education of a young gentleman.'
In this, chapter 3 (i.e. foll. 13-20) is 'An introduction to the Latin
tongue, by Ezerel Tong, D.D.'




=Nathaniel Torporley= (1563-1632).


[1094]Mr. J.[1095] Torporley--Mr. <Robert> Hooke affirms to me that Mr.
J. Torporley was amanuensis to Vieta[1096]; but from whom he had that
information he haz now forgot, but he had good and credible authority
for it, and bids me tell you that he was certainly so.

He printed something against Vieta by the name of John Poulterey (a
disguised name, the same letters a little transpos'd).

[1097]Memorandum:--Mr. Nicholas Mercator (who taught the last earl of
Northumberland[1098], then lord Percy, at Petworth) assures me that
the earle of Northumberland who was prisoner in the Tower gave also a
pension to one Mr. ... Torporley, Salopiensis, a learned man; and that
in the library of that family (I thinke) at Petworth, are some papers
of his: quaere iterum.

Ex catalogo librorum Bibliothecae Bodleianae:

_Nath. Torporlaeus_, Diclides coelometricae, seu valvae astronomicae
universales: Lond. 1602, 4to: C. 46 _Art._




=Thomas Triplett= (1603-1670).


[1099]Next to Dr. Outram's inscription <in the south aisle of
Westminster abbey> stands this of Dr. Triplett, in the very place
where Mr. Thomas May's stood, of white marble[1100]:--

                          Hic requiescit vir
                    Reverend. Dr. Thomas Triplett,
                          ex agro Oxoniensi,
                    Praebendarius hujus ecclesiae,
              Qui postquam ad annum aetatis septuagesimum
                  pietate et cultus assiduitate, Deo,
             Graecae linguae peritia non vulgari, doctis,
              largitate et continua beneficentia, egenis,
                  morum innocua jucunditate, omnibus,
                         carum se praebuisset,
                 Ab hac vita ad meliorem commigravit,
                           Anno Domini 1670
                             Die Julii 18.

He went to schoole to Dr. Gill, as appeares by his ballad[1101], which
will last longer then any sermon that ever he made.

After his sequestration[1102] he kept a schoole at Dublyn (when the
king was beheaded); afterwards at Hayes, Surrey, 12 miles from London.
'Twas here our[1103] common friend George Ent went to schoole to him,
who told me that he had forgot the smart of his old master, Gill; he
was very severe.

I'le tell you a story of our old friend. His master Triplett was a
great lover of honey, and one of his schoolefellow's mother having sent
a pott of honey to the doctor, G. Ent putt his schoolefellow to beg
a little of his master, and he had gott a manchet and so they would
have a _regalio_. The doctor was in his study; and the boy takes the
confidence to approach, with his 'Quaeso, praeceptor, da mihi mel.'
G. Ent was sneaking behind. Qᵈ. the disturbed doctor, 'You audacious
raskall,' and gave him a good cuffe on the ear, 'how dare you be thus
impudent? Sirrah, who putt you on?' The boy answered (whiningly) 'G.
Ent.' The enraged doctor flies out of his study (he was a very strong
man), gives poore George a kick in the breech, and made him fly downe
a flight of 7 or 8 staires to the landing-place, where his head first
came to. He was stunn'd, but 'twas well his neck was not broken. 'Twas
a most cruel and inhumane act to use a poore child so. It so happened
that a day or two before G. E. had shaled a tooth. He writes a letter
to his father (now Sir George Ent) and incloses the tooth in it;
relates the story and that he lost the tooth by that meanes[1104].
The next day the grave and learned Dr. Ent comes to Hayes (the fame
of whose learning and testimonie did give great credit and reputation
to this schoole); expostulates with the doctor about his sonne. To
be short, tooke him away, and placed him with Mr. William Radford at
Richmond (an honest sequestred fellow of Trinity College, Oxon, and an
excellent schoolmaster, having been bred at Thame under Dr. Birt[1105]
and afterwards sent to Winton.) This accident well-nigh did breake
Dr. Triplett's schoole. But shortly after this time, happened the
restauration of his majestie, and then he was also restored to his
former preferments.




=Thomas Tusser= (1527-1580).


[1106]Memorandum:--Edward Bullock, of Fayburne-hall, in Essex, esq.
assures me, that this Tusser was borne at Riven-hall in Essex. The
howse wherein he was borne they doe yet shew. He rented the parsonage
of Fairested. He speakes in his booke of the people's cosening him of
his tythes.




=William Twisse= (1574-1646).


[1107]... Twisse, D.D., of Newbury:--his sonne Dr. ... Twisse, minister
of the new church neer Tothil street, Westminster, told me that he
had heard his father say that when he was a schoole-boy at Winton
Colledge that he was a rakell, and that one of his schoolefellowes and
camerades (as wild as himselfe) dyed there; and that his father goeing
in the night to the house of office, the phantome or ghost of his dead
schoolefollow appeared to him and told him 'I am damn'd'; and that this
was the beginning of his conversion.

Memorandum:--the Dr. had a melancholique and hypo-condriaque
temperament.




=John Twyne= (15--- 1581).


[1108]Jo. Twini, Bolingdunesis, Angli, de rebus Albionicis,
Britannicis, atque Anglicis commentariorum libri 2, ad Thomam Twinum,
filium: Lond. 1599.

The father was schoolmaster of St. Saviour's in Canterbury. John Leland
haz verses on him.




=Thomas Twyne= (1543-1613).


[1109]☞ From Mr. Meredith Lloyd--'The Breviarie of Britaine of Humphrey
Lloyd, dedicated to Ortelius, translated out of Latine by Mr. Twyne,
wherein are the etymologies of the Welsh names, rivers, cities, etc.'
He says that the Latin edition is altogether false writt, which names
Mr. Twyne hath printed true in the English edition.




=Thomas Tyndale= (1588-1671/2).


    <In MS. Aubr. 21, among the notes Aubrey has jotted down for
    his projected comedy _The Country Revel_, are a number under
    the initials of T. T., i.e. of Thomas Tyndale (see p. 190,
    _supra_), whom Aubrey took for his model in depicting an
    old gentleman ('Sir Eubule Nestor') of the heroic age. Some
    of these opinions of 'an old courtier of the Queen's' are
    collected here.>

In those days (Elizabetha regina) the great men had a gate (the
yettes), and when a senator went to the Parliament-house a-foote, or a
horse-back with his foot-cloath, he had at his heeles 1/2 a dozen or 10
tall fellowes with blew coates and badges and long basket-hilt swords.
Now forsooth only a laquey and a little spitt-pig[1110].

T. T.--The advantage that king Charles I had: gentlemen tho[1111] kept
good horses, and many horses for a man-at-armes, and men that could
ride them; hunting horses. Now we are come all to our coaches forsooth!
(Sir Philip Sydney[1112]). Now young men are so farre from managing
good horses, they know not how to ride a hunting nag nor handle their
weapons. So God help the king if, etc.

In Sir Philip Sydney's time 'twas as much disgrace for a cavalier to be
seen in London rideing in a coach in the street as now 'twould be to be
seen in a petticoate and wastcoate. They rode in the streets then with
their rich footcloathes, and servants wayting on them with blewe coates
and badge, 6[1113], 8, 12 +.

T. T., an old gentleman that remembers Queen Elizabeth's raigne and
court, one of true gravity and prudence, not one that depends upon the
grave cutt of his beard to be thought so. He hath seen much in his
time both at home and abroade; and with much choler inveighes against
things now:--'Alas! O' God's will! Now-a-dayes every one, forsooth!
must have coaches, forsooth! In those dayes gentlemen kept horses for
a man-at-armes, besides their hackney and hunting horses. This made
the gentry robust and hardy and fitt for service; were able to be
their owne guides in case of a rout or so, when occasion should so
require[1114]. Our gentry forsooth in these dayes are so effeminated
that they know not how to ride on horseback.--Tho when the gentry mett,
it was not at a poor blind sordid alehouse, to drinke up a barrell of
drinke and lie drunke there two or three dayes together; fall together
by the eares. They mett tho in the fields, well-appointed, with their
hounds or their hawkes; kept up good hospitality; and kept a good
retinue, that would venture that bloud and spirit that filled their
vaines which their masters' tables nourisht[1115]; kept their tenants
in due respect of them. We had no depopulacion in those dayes.

'You see in me the ruines of time. The day is almost at end with
me, and truly I am glad of it: I desire not to live in this corrupt
age. I foresawe and foretold the late changes, and now easily foresee
what will follow after. Alas! O' God's will! It was not so in Queen
Elizabeth's time: then youth had[1116] respect to old age.

'Revels--Tho the elders and better sort of the parish sate and beheld
the pastimes of the young men, as wrastling, shooting at butts,
bowling, and dancing. All this is now lost; and pride, whoreing,
wantonnesses, and drunkennesses. Tho the charity of the feast, St.
Peter's box[1117], maintayned the old impotent poore.'




=James Usher= (1580/1-1655/6).


[1118]Memorandum:--... Usher, Lord Primate <of Ireland>, was at
Llantrithed[1119] for severall moneths, and divertised himselfe much to
talke with the poore people to understand Welsh, for that 'it had,' he
sayd, 'a great affinity with the Irish.' He sayd the Old Testament was
translated by the Universities, but the New Testament was translated by
the bishops; but the Old is much better donne.




=Henry Vaughan= (1621-1695).

=Thomas Vaughan= (1621-1666/7).


[1120]There are two Vaughans, twinnes, both very ingeniose and
writers. One writt a poeme called _Olor Iscanus_ (Henry Vaughan, the
first-borne), and another booke of Divine Meditations. His brother
wrote severall treatises, whose names I have now forgott, but names
himself _Eugenius Philalethes_.

They were borne at Llansanfraid in Brecknockshire, by the river Uske
(Isca). Their grandmother was an Aubrey: their father, a coxcombe and
no honester then he should be--he cosened me of 50_s._ once.

Eugenius Philalethes was of Jesus College. Whither Henry was I have
forgotten; but he was a clarke sometime to Judge Sir Marmaduke
Lloyd[1121].

[1122]Henry Vaughan, 'Silurist':--you know Silures contayned
Breconockshire, Herefordshire, etc.

[1123]My brother and I were borne att Newton, in Brecknockshire, in the
parish of St. Briget's, in the year 1621.

I stayed not att Oxford to take my degree, but was sent to London,
beinge then designed by my father for the study of the law, which the
sudden eruption of our late civil warres wholie frustrated.

My brother continued there for 10 or 12 yeares, and I thinke he could
be noe lesse than Master of Arts. He died upon an imployment for his
majesty, within 5 or 6 miles of Oxford, in the yeare that the last
great plague visited London. He was buried by Sir Robert Murrey,
his great friend (and then secretary of estate for the kingdome of
Scotland); to whome he gave his bookes and MSS.

[1124]My profession allso is physic, which I have practised now for
many years with good successe (I thanke God) and a repute big enough
for a person of greater parts than my selfe.

[1125]My brother died in the seaven and fortieth year of his age, upon
the 27th of Februarie in the yeare 1666, and was buried upon the first
of March.

[1126]Sir Robert Moray ... told me he buryed <my cosen Thomas Vaughan>
at Albery neer Ricot within three miles of Oxford. He dyed at Mr.
[Sam.[1127]] Kem's howse, the minister.




=Edward de Vere=, 17th earl of Oxford (15--- 1604).


[1128]Mr. Thomas Henshawe, Regiae Societatis Socius, tells me that
Nicholas Hill was secretary to ..., the great earle of Oxford, who
spent fourty thousand pounds per annum in seaven yeares travell. He
lived at Florence in more grandeur than the duke of Tuscany[1129].

This earle of Oxford, making of his low obeisance to queen Elizabeth,
happened to ..., at which he was so abashed[1130] that he went to
travell 7 yeares. On his returne the queen welcomed him home and sayd,
'My lord, I had forgot the ...'

A poor man[1131] askt of Mr. Hill one time to give him 6_d._ (or 1_s._
or such an almes). Sayd Mr. Hill 'What doest say, if I give thee ten
pounds?' 'Oh!' sayd he, 'ten pounds would make me a man.' And he did
put it downe in the account--'Item, x_li._ for making a man'--which his
lordship allowed and was well pleased at it.




=Villiers=, duke of Buckingham.


[1132]George Villiers, 1st duke of Buckingham, natus 28 Aug. 1592, 4ʰ
40´ A.M., at Brookesby, Leicestershire.

George, filius of the duke of Buckingham, natus 30 Januarii, 1627/8;
obiit in Yorkshire, Saturday, 16 Apr. 1687.

[1133](_a_) George, duke of Buckingham, borne Aug. 28, Thursday, 15ʰ
P.M. 1595.--(_b_) George Villiers, duke of Buckingham, natus Tuesd.
28 Aug. 1592, 16ʰ 45´ P.M.--[Here (_b_) the yeare is 1592; but in the
former (_a_) 1595.]

The duke's sonne borne Wedn. 30 January 1627/8, 1ʰ P.M.

The countesse of Bucks[1134] died of a dropsi and phisick, 14 Apr. 1632.

[1135]Vide in _Vaticinium Poeticum_ de obitu lord Francis Villers[1136].




=William de Visscher.=


[1137]From Mr. Bovey:--William de Visscher, merchant in London,
borne at Emden in East Frisland in Germany, a Hans-towne--now under
the Dutch. At 2 yeares old was brought into England by his father,
an eminent merchant; lived 55 yeares in one house at St. Mary Hill,
and dyed in the 74th yeare of his age. He lived there till the fire
of London; he dyed about 3 yeares after--he did not enjoy himselfe
afterwards.

In the last great dearth of corne in England, which was in
anno[XC.] ..., when there was a great complaint and cry of the poore,
he bade them bee of good comfort for they should not starve, for he
would give them his labour and the use of his estate for that yeare.
He being a man of vast credit, gave his factors order that what corne
they could buy at such and such rates beyond sea, to hire flye-boates
and send them over to the port of London, of which he bought in one
yeare two thousand five hundred sayle. The corne that cost him 12_s._
per bushell beyond sea, he sold here for 14_s._; and some of the places
from whence he had corne (they selling it by reason of the greatnesse
of the price) afterwards wanted it themselves and were faine to be
supplied from hence, i.e. in some places, for which they were faine to
pay halfe value more then the first cost, or els must have starved.

[XC.] + Quaere annum. About 30 years since. I beleive it was 1647, or
1648--quaere.

Many disasters happened to many of the shippes that were bound for
London (some that never arrived were destroyed by foule weather; some
wind-bound so long till their corne fired for want of ayering, and was
faine to be throwne over-board) that in the whole matter, after all the
adventures runne, he did not gaine five and twenty hundred pounds. The
fly-boates caryed 800 tunne, and some more.

He left two sonnes and <one> daughter behind him, named Isabella (who
was maried to Mr. James Bovey, by which he haz one sonne and one
daughter).

He was a very eminent merchant, as most was of his time; and was valued
by common reputation (when he maried his daughter) to be worth sixscore
thousand pounds.

He stayed in London during the whole time of the plague, and had not
all that time one sick in his family. He was a temperate man, and had
his house very cleanly kept.




=Isaac Vossius= (1618-1688).


[1138]Isaac Vossius died at his lodgeings in Windsor Castle, February
the tenth, anno 1688/9; and hath left the best private library, they
say, in the world. 'Tis sayd king William will buy it to send into
Holland[1139].




=Johannes Gerhardus Vossius= (1577-1649).


[1140]He alwayes wrote his Adversaria on one side only of a sheet of
paper, so that as occasion required, he only tore his papers and fixt
them together, and would so send them to the presse without any more
transcribing. If his paper would beare ink of one side 'twas as much
as he desired. This way did save him a great deale of paines--quod
N.B.:--from Dr. John Pell.

Vide Drexelii, e Soc. Jesu, _de legendis auctoribus cum proficuo_.

_Sir Isaac Wake_ (1575-1632).

[1141]Sir Isaac Wake: he had a fine seate at Hampsted in Middlesex,
which lookes over London and Surrey, where he made those delicate
walkes of pines and firres, also corme-trees, etc.--The Lord Chiefe
Baron Wyld[1142] had it afterwards. His study was mighty pleasant.

The lord de la Ware, who maried the daughter and heire of the chiefe
baron, sold this seat about 1683 to a citizen of London, who pulled it
downe to build a house (1686).

The Chief Baron told his cosen Edmund Wyld, esq., that Sir Isaac Wake
was the first that planted pines and firres in England. E. W. might
have had the study for 8 _li._ per annum.




=Clement Walker= (1595-1651).


[1143]Clement Walker, esq. ('Theodorus Verax'), author of the History
of Independency, was of Christ Church, Oxon. Obiit ..., in the Tower
(about Worcester fight).

[1144]Clement Walker[CE], esq.--vide registrum at All Hallows, Barking,
about 1650, ubi sepultus, November:--he asked about an hower before he
dyed, how long it was to full-sea. They sayd, an hower. 'Then,' sayd
he, 'at that time I shall depart'; and he did so, quietly--from E.
P--.,, esq., his fellow-prisoner there, who told me that he wrote a
continuation of his Historic of the king's comeing to Worcester: 'tis
pitty 'tis lost.

His son[CF], W. W., now living, was a minor when his father dyed;
and ..., an elder brother of his, was made executor, who is also dead.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[CE] Aubrey adds also the references:--(_a_) 'vide A<nthony> W<ood's>
lettre, about June 1681'; (_b_) 'vide Φ, p. 88,' a MS. I have been
unable to identify.

[CF] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 360: July 14, 1681:--'Mr. Clement
Walker's son tells me that his father was buried in Allhallowes Barking
church, November ..., 1652: wherabout he knowes not, being then but 9
aetatis.'




=Edmund Waller= (1605/6-1687).


[1145]Mr. Edmund Waller of Beconsfield, the poet, was borne[XCI.] at
Colshill[CG] in Hertfordshire neer Agmundesham A.D. 1606, Martii die
13, horâ 18, min. 16 P.M.--scilicet March after the Gunpowder plot.

[XCI.] 'Edmundus Waller, poeta, natus tertio die Martii anno Domini
1605/6--from Sir William Petty.'--MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 112.

This was done in Italie by an Italian:--

    'Hic Mercurius in 12ª monstrat felix et sublime ingenium,
    sed ipsi autori noxium propter □ cum Luna. Saturnus in Medio
    Coeli indicat multos inimicos, quibus tamen natus praevalebit
    propter △ quem habet Saturnus cum Venere. Supervivet natus
    suae uxori; caveat tamen sibi 1655, minantur enim tunc astra
    morbum periculosum, quem si natus superat, poterit (naturaliter
    loquendo) pervenire ad annum 1669. Apparet tamen periculum
    ab aquis et a veneno. Videtur honorandus ab aliquo principe
    externo.--Complexio est frigida et humida, unde bonum erit uti
    cibis calidis, sed facilis digestionis propter debilitatem
    stomachi.'

Obiit Octob. 20, 1687; sepultus at Beconsfield in the churchyard with
his father and grandfathers, where are two walnutt-trees sett at the
head and foot of his grandfather's grave.

[1146]Edmund Waller[CH], esq., son and heire of <Robert Waller> by
<Anne> Hamden. He was cosen-germane to Oliver Cromwell, Protector,
whose mother was his mother's sister.

He was borne at Beconsfield, in Bucks, Anno Domini ... (quaere) in the
fair brick house, the farthest on the left hand, as you goe to Wickham.

He had grammer learning from the information of Mr. <Gerard>
Dobson[CI], minister of Market Wickham, who taught a private schoole
there, and was (he told me) a good schoolmaster, and had been bred at
Eaton College schoole. I have heard Mr. Thomas Bigge, of Wickham, say
(who was his schoole-fellow, and of the same forme), that he little
thought then he would have been so rare a poet; he was wont to make his
exercise for him.

His paternall estate, and by his first wife, was 3000 _li._ per annum.
His first wife was ... (vide Heralds' Office) of Worcestershire, by
whom he had ... per annum, and issue by her, son. His second wife
(maried to her A.D. ...) was ... Brace; a woman beautifull and very
prudent, by whom he has severall children (I thinke 10 or 12).

About[1147] 23, or between that and thirty, he grew (upon I know not
what occasion) mad; but 'twas (I thinke) not long ere[1148] he was
cured:--this from Mr. Thomas Bigg.

             _Non tulit aethereos pectus mortale tumultus._

                                                          OVID.

Memorandum:--he was proud: to such, a check often gives that distemper.

He was passionately in love with Dorothea, the eldest daughter of the
earle of Leicester[CJ], whom he haz eternized in his poems: and the
earle loved him, and would have been contented that he should have had
one of the youngest daughters; perhaps _this_ might be the check[XCII.].

[XCII.] Mr. Thomas Big of Wickham haz been dead these 20 yeares, who
could have told me the cause. I beleeve that I am right. You see how
things become antiquated.

... Waller (I thinke, Walter) was his tutor at King's College,
Cambridge, who was a very learned man, and was afterwards vicar of
Broad Chalke, Wilts.

A burghesse in Parliament, for Beconsfield, in king James's[1149] time,
and has been of all the Parliaments since the restauration of king
Charles II (1680, aetat. 74 +).

One of the first refiners of our English language and poetrey. When he
was a brisque young sparke, and first studyed poetry, 'Methought,' said
he, 'I never sawe a good copie of English verses; they want smoothnes;
then I began to essay.' I have severall times heard him say, that he
cannot versify when he will; but when the fitt comes upon him, he does
it easily, i.e. in plaine termes, when his Mercurius and Venus are well
aspected.

He told me he was not acquainted with Ben. Johnson (who dyed about
1638), but familiarly with Lucius, lord Falkland; Sydney Godolphin, Mr.
Hobbes; &c.

He was very much admired at Court before the late civill warres. 164-,
he being then a member of the House of Commons, he was committed
prisoner to the Tower, for the plott, with <Nathaniel> Tomkins (his
cosen-germane)[1150] and <Richard> Chaloner, for firing the City of
London, and delivering the Parliament, etc. to the King's partie:
vide Transactions of those times. He had much adoe then to save his
life, and in order to it, sold his estate in Bedfordshire, about[1151]
1300 _li._ per annum, to Dr. Wright, M.D. for 10,000 _li._, (much
under value) which was procured in 24 hours' time, or els he had been
hanged (quaere E. Wyld, esq.). With which money he bribed the whole
House, which was the first time a House of Commons was ever bribed.
His excellent rhetoricall speech to the House (vide his speech to
save his life), as also his panegyrique to Oliver, Lord Protector, he
would not suffer to be inserted in the edition of his Poems since the
restauration of king Charles II.

After he had obtayned his pardon of the Parliament, he went to France,
where he stayed ... yeares, and was there very kindly recieved, and
esteemed. Anno Domini ... he returned into England.

When king Charles II returned, he recieved Mr. Waller very kindly,
and no man's conversation is more esteemed at court now then his. The
dutches of Yorke (daughter to the duke of Modena) very much delights
<in> his company, and hath layed her commands on him to write, which he
hath dedicated to her highnes.

His intellectualls are very good yet[1152] (1680), and makes verses;
but he growes feeble. He wrote verses of the Bermudas 50 yeares since,
upon the information of one that had been there; walking in his fine
woods, the poetique spirit came upon him.

He is of somewhat above a middle stature, thin body, not at all
robust: fine thin skin, his face somewhat of an olivaster; his hayre
frizzd, of a brownish colour; full eye, popping out and working:
ovall faced, his forehead high and full of wrinckles. His head but
small, braine very hott, and apt to be cholerique--_Quanto doctior,
eo iracundior._--CICERO. He is something magisteriall, and haz[1153]
a great mastership of the English language. He is of admirable and
gracefull elocution, and exceeding ready.

He has spent most of his time in London, especially in winter; but
oftentimes in the summer he enjoyes his muse at Beconsfield, which is
incomparable aire, and where are delicious walks in the woods. Now I
speake of woods, I remember he told us there, that he cutt downe and
grubbed-up a beech wood of his, at Beconsfield in Bucks, and without
soweing, but naturally, there grew up[1154] a wood all of birch.

A.D. ... he was admitted a fellow of the Royall Societie.

He haz but a tender weake body, but was alwayes very temperate. ...
(quaere Samuel Butler) made him damnable drunke at Somerset-house,
where, at the water-stayres, he fell downe, and had a cruell fall.
'Twas pitty to use such a sweet swan so inhumanely[1155].

[1156]He hath a great memory, and remembers a history, etc. etc. best
when read to him: he uses to make his daughters read to him. Yet,
notwithstanding his great witt and mastership in rhetorique, etc.
he will oftentimes be guilty of mispelling in English. He writes a
lamentably <bad> hand, as bad <as> the scratching of a hen.

I have heard him say that he so much admired Mr. Thomas Hobbes' booke
_De Cive_, when it came forth, that he was very desirous to have it
donne into English, and Mr. Hobbes was most willing it should be done
by Mr. Waller's hand, for that he was so great a master of our English
language. Mr. Waller freely promised him to doe it, but first he would
desire Mr. Hobbes to make an essaye; he (T. H.) did the first booke,
and did it so extremely well, that Mr. Waller would not meddle with
it[1157], for that nobody els could doe it so well. Had he thought
he could have better performed it, he would have himselfe been the
translator.

Memorandum: his Speech against Ship-money which is in his booke of
Poems: his Panegyrique to Oliver the Protector I have: and also to King
Charles II.

He sayes that he was bred under severall ill, dull, ignorant
schoolmasters, till he went to Mr. Dobson, at ... Wickham, who was a
good schoolmaster, and had been an Eaton scholar.

Memorandum:--later end of Aug. 1680, he wrote verses, called 'Divine
Love,' at the instance and request of the lady viscountesse Ranulagh.

He missed[1158] the Provostship of Eaton Colledge, <Feb.> 1680 <i.e.
0/1>; <Zachary Cradock> haz it.

[1159]He lies buried in the church-yard (south east of the church),
where his grandfather and father were buried. This burying-place
<is> railed about like a pound, and about that bignesse. There is a
walnut tree planted, that is, perhaps, 50 yeares old: (the walnut tree
is their crest.) There are nine graves or cippi, no gravestone or
inscription. They lye thus:

[Illustration: _Edm. Waller ~Pastor~ Poeta._]

[1160]From Capt. Edmund Hamden, his cousin-german, 1690:--Edmund
Waller, esq., was borne in the parish of Agmundesham, in
Buckinghamshire, at a place called Winchmore-hill, which was sold by
his father, and which he had a very great desire to have bought again,
not long before his death, but the owner would not sell it: part of
the house haz been new-built, but the roome wherein he was borne is
yet standing. Said he, to his cousin Hamden, _A stagge, when he is
hunted, and neer spent, alwayes returnes home_. He dyed at 83, and his
witt was as florid then as at any time of his life. He derived his
poëtick[1161] witt from the Hamdens; severall of them have been poets.

Whereas Rutt, that kept the ... Inne (the Crowne, I thinke) at
Beconsfield, told me, many yeares since, that he had been distempered;
captain Hamden affirmes it is false; but his brother was a foole, as to
discourse or businesse, but was very learned. And whereas Dr. <Peter>
Birch told me that he had a prodigiouse memorie; his sonnes affirme
that he had no good memorie, and was never good to learne a thing by
heart, but some things that pleased him he did strongly retaine.

[1162]Captain Hamden told me that the soldiers came to Beconsfield to
search for money; his mother told them if they would goe along with
her, she would shew them where she had buried five thousands pounds,
and had them to the house of office.

[1163]Edmund Waller, esq., poet:--Mr. Christopher Wase repeating to him
the bitter satyricall verses[XCIII.] made on Sir Carre Scroop, viz.--

    Thy brother murdred, and thy sister whor'd,
    Thy mother too--and yet thy penne's thy sword;

[XCIII.] 4 or 6 verses made against him by Driden or somebody else.
<Marginal note by Anthony Wood.>

Mr. Waller replyed _sur le champ_ 'that men write ill things well and
good things ill; that satyricall[1164] writing was downehill, most
easie and naturall; that at Billingsgate one might hear great heights
of such witt; that the cursed earth naturally produces briars and
thornes and weeds, but roses and fine flowers require cultivation.'

All his writings are free from offence.

His poems are reprinted now (1682) by his owne orders and his pictures
(young and old) before it, and underneath

                        Sed Carmina major imago.

                                     OVID. <Trist. I. vii. 11.>

[Edmund Waller[1165]:--] he made some verses of his owne dyeing, but a
fortnight, or little more, before his decease.

_Notes._

[CG] In MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 112, not in Aubrey's handwriting, is the same
_Thema genethliacon_, with the judgement upon it. There Aubrey notes:--

'This account I had from Dr. <Peter> Birch, minister of St. James's,
who maried one of Mr. Waller's daughters.'

The conclusion of the judgement there is:--

'Natus apud Colshill[XCIV.] in agro Hartfordiensi juxta ... Denatus
Oct. 20, 1687; sepultus Beconsfield in agro Buckinghamiensi. Pater,
Robertus Waller; mater, Anne Hamden.'

[XCIV.] 'Tis a mistake: vide next leafe--<i.e. fol. 113>.

[CH] Aubrey notes that he was of 'Cambr.', and gives in colours the
coat 'sable, 3 walnut leaves in bend between two bendlets or.' Also,
he notes (_a_) 'vide Heralds' Office'; (_b_) 'gett his nativity'--see
_supra_, p. 273.

[CI] Gerard Dobson, M.A., Magd. Coll., Oxon. 1613, Vicar of High
Wycombe 1629.

[CJ] Dorothy, daughter of Robert Sydney, 2nd earl of Leicester, married
Henry Spencer, 3rd baron Spencer of Wormleighton, created earl of
Sunderland in June, 1643, and killed at Newbury Sept. 20, 1643.




=John Wallis= (1616-1703).


[1166]John Wallis, D.D.--I find at Lid in Kent that his father was Mr.
John Wallis, minister of Ashford, in Kent.

[1167]John Wallis[CK], D.D., was borne at Ashford, in the county of
Kent, Anno Domini <1616>. His father was minister there. He went to
schoole there.

At ... yeares old he was admitted at Emanuel Colledge in Cambridge;
'ubi fuit alumnus, deinde Collegii Reginalis ibidem socius' (Mr.
Oughtred's preface to his _Clavis_). Anno <1636/7> A.B.; anno
<1640> M.A. He was a good student, but fell not to the study of the
mathematiques till he was above twenty.

A[CL] remarkable passage of his life, was, that he was a witnesse of W.
Laud's (archbishop of Canterbury) tryall, for his introducing popish
innovations into the University of Cambridge: see _Canterbury's Doome_,
printed 1646, pag. 73, and elswhere. The first remarqueable passage of
his life was his decyphering the letters of King Charles I taken at the
battle at Nasby, which booke is called _The King's Cabinet Opened_,
printed at London, ... Anno ... was scolar to Mr. W. Oughtred.

Anno 164<9> after the Visitation by the Parliament, he came to Oxon,
and was made Savillian Professor of Geometrie. ..., <elected> Fellow
of the Royall Societie. Great[1168] contests between him and Mr.
Thomas Hobbes, of Malmesbury: sure their Mercuries are in □[1169] or
opposition. Anno Domini 1657, he gott himselfe to be chosen by unjust
meanes[XCV.] to be Custos Archivorum of the University of Oxon, at
which time Dr. <Richard> Zouch had the majority of voyces, but because
Dr. Zouch was a malignant (as Dr. Wallis openly protested, and that he
had talked against Oliver), he was putt aside. Now, for the Savillian
Professor to hold another place besides, is so downeright against Sir
Henry Savile's statutes, that nothing can be imagined more; and if he
does, he is downeright perjured. Yet the Dr. is allowed to keepe the
other place still.

[XCV.] Vide Henry Stubbes' (The Savillian Professour's case stated:
Lond. 1658) de hoc: who haz told him of it.

Anno <1654> he tooke his degree of Doctor, at the Act, at Oxon, and
went out grand-compounder (which costes 200 _li._), only that he might
take place[1170] of Dr. Seth Ward, who was about a yeare his senior.
In 1661 Dr. Ward was made deane of Exon, and the next yeare bishop of
the same place; and so Dr. Wallis's 200 _li._ was meerly cast away. The
bishop protested he was troubled for the losse of his brother Wallis's
two hundred pounds.

He hath writt severall treatises, and well; and to give him his due
prayse, hath exceedingly well deserved of the commonwealth of learning,
perhaps no mathematicall writer so much.

'Tis certaine that he is a person of reall worth, and may stand[CM]
with much glory upon his owne basis, needing not <to> be beholding to
any man for fame, of which he is so extremely greedy, that he steales
flowers from others to adorne his owne cap,--e.g. he lies at watch, at
Sir Christopher[1171] Wren's discourse, Mr. Robert Hooke's, Dr. William
Holder[1172], &c.; putts downe their notions in his note booke, and
then prints it, without owneing the authors. This frequently, of which
they complaine.

But though he does an injury to the inventors, he does good to
learning, in publishing such curious notions, which the author
(especially Sir Christopher Wren) might never have the leisure to write
of himselfe.

When Mr. Oughtred's _Clavis Mathematica_ was printed at Oxford (editio
tertia, with additions), Mr. W. O.,[1173] in his preface, gives
worthy characters of severall young mathematicians that he enformed,
and, amongst others, of John Wallis, who would be so kind to Mr.
Oughtred, as to take the paines to correct the presse, which the old
gentleman doth with respect there thus acknowledge, after he hath
enumerated his titles and preferments; _viri ingenui, pii, industrii,
in omni reconditiore literatura versatissimi, in rebus Mathematicis
admodum perspicacis, et in enodatione explicationeque scriptorum
intricatissimis Zipherarum involucris occultatorum (quod ingenii
subtilissimi argumentum est) ad miraculum foelicis_. This last, of the
cyphers, was added by Dr. Wallis himselfe; which when, the booke being
printed, the old gentleman sawe, he was much vexed at it; and sayd,
that he had thought he had given him sufficient prayse, with which he
might have rested[1174] contented.

He maried ... and haz a good temporall estate in Kent.... He has only
two daughters, handsome young gentle-woemen; one maried to Mr. ...
Blencowe, of Middleton-Cheyney, in....

He lives at a well-built house, near New Colledge, in Oxon; is a
Justice of the Peace there, and has been 167-, 1679, 1680.


_Catalogus librorum ab illo scriptorum._

                              . . . . . .
                              . . . . . .


_Notes_.

[CK] Aubrey gives in colours the coat, 'gules, a bend ermine.' In
MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6ᵛ, he gives in trick, for John Wallis, the coat,
'ermine, a bend argent.'

[CL] This sentence stood at first:--'The first remarkable passage of
his life was that he was an instrument of fetching Laud's (archbishop
of Canterbury) head of, by being a witnesse at the tryall.' Then Aubrey
noted in the margin:--'Quaere which of these <i.e. Laud's trial, or the
king's letters _infra_> was first in time'; and afterwards altered the
sentence to what it now is.

[CM] A duplicate draft of this sentence is--'and may stand very
gloriously upon his owne basis, and need not be beholding to any man
for fame, yet he is so extremely greedy of glorie, that he steales
feathers from others to adorne himselfe.'




=Lucy Walters.=


[1175]Memorandum:--Mr. Freeman (who maried the lady Lake) has the
duke of Monmouth's mother's--Mrs. Lucy[1176] Walters, who could deny
nobody--picture, very like her, at Stanmore neer Harrow-on-the-hill.




=Seth Ward= (1617-1688/9).


<_Birth and education._>

[1177]Seth Ward[CN], lord bishop of Sarum, was borne at Buntingford, a
small market-towne in Hartfordshire, anno Domini 1618[1178], December
the ..., (when the great blazing starre appeared). His father was an
attorney there, and of a very honest repute.

At <16> yeares old he went to Sydney Colledge in Cambridge; he was
servitor[XCVI.] to Dr. <Samuel> Ward (Master of the Colledge, and
Professor of Divinity), who, being much taken with his ingenuity and
industry, as also with his suavity of nature, quickly made him scholar
of the howse, and after, fellowe. Though he was of his name, he was
not at all akinne to him (which most men imagined because of the great
kindnesse to him); but the consimility of their dispositions was a
greater tye of friendship then that of blood, which signifies but
little, as to that point.

[XCVI.] Expunge 'servitour,' _euphoniae gratia_.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 8.


<_Mathematical studies._>

His father taught him common arithmetique, and his genius lay much to
the mathematiques, which being naturall to him, he quickly and easily
attained.

Sir Charles Scarborough, M.D. (then an ingeniose young student,
and fellowe--quaere--of Caius Colledge in Cambridge), was his great
acquaintance; both students in mathematiques; which the better to
perfect, they went to Mr. Willam Oughtred, at Albury in Surrey, to be
enformed by him in his _Clavis Mathematica_, which was then a booke of
aenigmata. Mr. Oughtred treated them with exceeding humanity, being
pleased at his heart when an ingeniose young man came to him that would
ply his Algebra hard. When they returned to Cambridge, they read the
_Clavis Mathematica_ to their pupills, which was the first time that
that booke was ever read in a[1179] university. Mr. Laurence Rooke,
a good mathematician and algebrist, (and I thinke had also been Mr.
Oughtred's disciple[1180]) was his great acquaintance. ☞ Mr. Rooke (I
remember) did read (and that admirably well) on the sixth chapter of
the _Clavis Mathematica_ in Gresham Colledge.


<_Ejected from Cambridge._>

Anno Domini 164<4>, at the breaking out of the civill warres, he was a
prisoner, together with Dr. <Samuel> Ward, Dr. <Samuel> Collins, Sir
Thomas Hatton, &c. for[1181] the king's cause, in St. John's Colledge
in Cambridge, and was[1182] putt out of his fellowship at Sydney
Colledge. Being gott out of prison, he was very civilly and kindly
received by his friend and neighbour, Ralph Freeman, of Apsten, esq., a
vertuous and hospitable gentleman, where he continued....


<_Professor in Oxford._>

Anno Domini <1648> the Visitation of the Parliament was Oxford, and
turned out a great many professors and fellowes. The Astronomy Reader
(Dr.[1183] <John> Greaves) being sure to be ejected, Seth Ward, A.M.
(living[1184] then with my lord Wenman, in Oxfordshire, and ... Greaves
was unwilling to be turned out of his place, but desired to resigne
it rather to some worthy person, wherupon Dr. Charles Scarborough and
William Holder, D.D. recommended to ... Greaves, their common friend,
Mr. Seth Ward) was invited to succeed him, and came from Mr. Freeman's
to Oxford, had the Astronomy Professor's place, and lived at Wadham
Colledge, where he conversed with the warden, Dr. John Wilkins.


<_First ecclesiastical dignity._>

[1185]Anno Domini 165- (quaere), he had from B<rownrigg> bishop of
Exon, the grant of the chantor's place of Exon, which then signified
nothing.


<_President of Trinity College, Oxford._>

Anno Domini 165<9> William Hawes, ...[1186], then president of Trinity
Colledge in Oxford, having broken in his lunges a vein (which was not
curable), Mr. Ward being very well acquainted and beloved in that
colledge; by the consent of all the fellowes, William Hawes resigned
up his presidentship to him, and dyed some few dayes after[CO]. Anno
1660, upon the restauration of King Charles II, Dr. Hannibal Potter
(the president sequestred by the Parliamentary Visitors) re-enjoyed the
presidentship again.

[1187]Dr. Seth Ward, now bishop of Sarum, when he was president of
Trinity College, Oxon, did draw his geometricall schemes with black,
red, yellow, green, and blew inke to avoid the perplexity of A, B, C,
etc.


<_His doctorate._>

[1188]I should have said that, anno 165<4>, he[1189] tooke his degree
of doctor in Divinity, at the Act, at Oxford, at the same time with Dr.
John Wallis.


<_Church preferment._>

He then enjoyed his chanter's place at Excester, and, I thinke, was
certainly minister of St. Laurence <Jewry> church (quaere) in London.

Anno Domini 166<1>, the deane of Exon dyed, and then it was his right
to step-in next to the deanry.


<_Becomes bishop of Exeter._>

Anno Domini 1663, the bishop of Exon dyed: Dr. Ward, the deane, was
in Devonshire at that time, at ... (I thinke 'twas Taverstoke), at a
visitation at ...,[XCVII.] where were a great number of the gentrey
of the countrey. Deane Ward was very well knowne to the gentry, and
his learning, prudence, and comity had wonne them[1190] all to be his
friends. The newes of the death of the bishop being brought to them,
who were all very merry and rejoycing with good entertainment, with
great alacrity the gentlemen cryed all, _uno uno_[1191], 'Wee will have
Mr. Deane[1192] to be our Bishop.' This was at that criticall time when
the House of Commons were the king's darlings. The deane told them that
for his part he had no interest or acquaintance at Court; but intimated
to them how much the king esteemed the members of parliament (and a
great many Parliament men were then there), and that his majestie would
deny them nothing. 'If 'tis so, gentlemen' (sayd Mr. Deane), 'that
you will needes have me to be your bishop, if some of you make your
addresse to his majestie, 'twill be donne.'--With that they[XCVIII.]
dranke the other glasse, a health to the king, and another to their
wished-for bishop; had their horses presently made ready, putt foot in
stirrup, and away they rode merrily to London; went to the king, and he
immediately graunted them their request. This is the first time that
ever a bishop was made by the House of Commons. Now, though envy cannot
deny, that this worthy person was very well worthy any preferment could
be conferred on him, yet the old bishops (e.g. Humphrey <Henchman>,
bishop of London; John Cosins, bishop of Durham; etc.)[1193] were
exceedingly disgruntled at it, to see a briske young bishop that could
see through all their formall gravity, but 40 yeares old, not come
in at the right dore but leape over the pale. It went to their very
hearts. Well, bishop of Excester he was, to the great joy of all the
diocese[1194]. Being bishop he had then free accesse to his majestie,
who is a lover of ingenuity and a discerner of ingeniose men, and
quickly tooke a liking to him.

[XCVII.] Vide the _Mercurius_ of that time; quaere H. Broome[1195] for
it.

[XCVIII.] Sir Edward Seymore; ... ...; ... ...; ... ...; ... ...

[1196]His great friend and patrone, Dr. <Samuel> Ward, ...; quaere what
preferment did Dr. <Seth> Ward give him in the Church?


<_Translated to Salisbury._>

[1197]Anno 1667, Alexander Hyde, the bishop of Sarum, dyed, and then he
was made bishop of Sarum, mense <Sept.>


<_Personal characteristics._>

He is (without all manner of flattery) so prudent, learned, and good a
man, that he honours his preferment as much as the preferment does him;
and is such a one that cannot be advanced too high. My lord (Lucius)
Falkland was wont to say that he never knew any one that a paire of
lawne sleeves had not altered from himselfe, but only bishop Juxon; had
he knowne this excellent prelate, he would have sayd he had knowne one
more. As he is the pattern of humility and courtesie, so he knowes when
to be severe and austere; and he is not one to be trampled or worked
upon. He is a batchelour, and of a most magnificent and munificent mind.

He hath been a benefactor to the Royall Societie, (of which he was one
of the first members and institutors[XCIX.]), gave them, Anno
Domini ... _li._ He also gave a noble pendulum clock to the Royall
Societie (which goes a weeke), to perpetuate[1198] the memory of his
deare and learned friend, Mr. Laurence Rooke.

[XCIX.] The beginning of Philosophicall Experiments was at Oxon, 1649,
by Dr. Wilkins, Seth Ward, Ralph Bathurst, &c.

Quaere, was the bishop ever professor at Gresham College?

He gave anno 167-, ... _li._ towards the making of the river at
Salisbury navigable to Christ Church. Anno 1679 he gave to Sydney
Colledge a thousand pounds.

He haz perused all the records of the Church of Sarum, which, with
long lyeing, had been conglutinated together; read them all over, and
taken abridgements of them, which haz not been donne by any of his
predecessors I beleeve for some hundreds of yeares.

He had an admirable habit of body (athletique, which was a fault), a
handsome man, pleasant and sanguine; he did not desire to have his
wisdome be judged by the gravity of his beard, but his prudence and
ratiotination. This, methinkes, is strange to consider in him, that
being a great student (and that of mathematiques and difficult knotty
points, which does use to make men unfit for businesse), he is so
cleare and ready, as no sollicitor is more adroit for looking after
affaires.


_Sicknes_[1199].

[1200]The black malice of the dean[CP] of Sarum--he printed
sarcasticall pamphletts against him--was the cause of his disturbd
spirit, wherby at length he quite lost his memorie. For about a moneth
before he dyed he tooke very little sustenance, but lived on the stock
and died a skeleton. He deceased at his house at Knightsbridge neer
London, on Sunday morning, January the sixth, 1688/9: the Gazetts and
Newsletters were severally mistaken as to the day of his death.--This
from Mr. Seth Ward, B.D.


<_His burial._>

[1201]Seth, episcopus Sarum, is buried at Sarum as neer as may be to
John Davenant, episcopus.


<_His papers._>

[1202]I searcht all Seth, episcopus Sarum's, papers that were at his
house at Knightsbridge where he dyed: of which I will give and bring
you an account when I come to Oxon about the latter end of this moneth.
I have taken care with his nephew and heir[1203] to looke over his
papers in his study at Sarum. He tells me the custome is, when the
bishop of Sarum dies, that 'the deane and chapter lock-up his studie
and put a seale on it.' It was not opened lately, but when it is he
will give me an account for you.


[1204]_Scripsit:_--

That there is a God--16mo: quaere nomen libri.

Vindiciae, 4to, Oxon.

... contra Thomam Hobbium, 8vo, Oxon.

Trigonometria, 4to, Oxon.

Astronomia geometrica, 4to, Oxon.

Severall sermons, wherof one was at the funerall of the duke of
Albemarle, who was his great friend, and whose eies he closed.

[1205]Seth Ward, lord bishop of Salisbury, studied the common lawe, and
I find this paper, which is his owne handwriting, amongst his scattered
papers which I rescued from being used by the cooke since his death,
which was destinated with other good papers and letters to be put under
pies.

[1206]He writ a reply to Bullialdus, which might be about the bigness
of his Astronomia Geometrica, which he lent to somebody (forgot), and
is lost. In the bishop's study are several letters between Bullialdus
and him, and between Hevelius and him.


<_His foundation at Buntingford._>

[1207]At Buntingford, Hertfordshire[CQ]:--

[1684.

This hospitall was erected and endowed by Seth Ward, D.D., lord bishop
of Salisbury and chancellor of the most noble order of the Garter, who
was born in this towne within the parish of Aspden and educated in the
free-schoole of Buntingford.]

The bishop's will not observed: the people there say so: cosen
Freeman[1208] said <so>.


<_Corrigendum._>

[1209]Seth Ward, episcopus Sarum:--Whereas I put downe in my
memorandums, from his owne mouth, viz. that he said, occasionally, that
'he was borne when the great comet appeared' (that, I am sure, was
in anno 1618); but his nephew, Seth Ward, treasurer of the church of
Sarum and his executor, told me that the last sommer he searched in the
register at Buntingford where he was born, and finds thus:--

'Seth Ward christned April 5, 1617.'


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[CN] Aubrey gives in trick the coat:--'See of Sarum; impaling, azure a
cross moline or.' Dr. Philip Bliss has added the references 'see parts
ii and iii,' i.e. MSS. Aubr. 7 and 8, as cited _supra_.

[CO] Hawes resigned Sept. 12, and died Sept. 14, 1659. Ward was elected
on Sept. 14.

[CP] Thomas Pierce, installed dean May 4, 1675, died March 28,
1691. Anthony Wood comments on Pierce's quarrelsome and tyrannical
disposition; Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, i. 420.

[CQ] The paragraph in square brackets is a copy of the inscription on
the building, sent to Aubrey by some correspondent. Over the date is
the coat of arms, as above, ensigned with a mitre and encircled by the
Garter buckle and motto.




=Walter Warner= (15--- 1640).


[1210]From Dr. John Pell:--Mr Walter Warner:--his youngest brother was
High Sheriff of Leicestershire, about 1642. He and his brother dyed
both batchelors. Dr. Pell haz seen him that was sheriff; but was well
acquainted with Walter. The estate came to a middle brother, a lame man.

Walter had but one hand (borne so), he thinks a right hand; his mother
was frighted, which caused this deformity, so that instead of a left
hand, he had only a stump with five warts upon it, instead of a hand
and fingers. He wore a cuffe on it like a pockett. The Doctor never
sawe his stump, but Mr. Warner's man[1211] has told him so.

This Walter Warner was both mathematician and philosopher, and 'twas he
that putt-out Thomas Hariot's Algebra, though he mentions it not.

Mr. Warner did tell Dr. Pell, that when Dr. Harvey came out with his
Circulation of the Blood, he did wonder whence Dr. Harvey had it: but
comeing one day to the earle of Leicester, he found Dr. Harvey in the
hall, talking very familiarly with Mr. Prothero (_Wallicè_ ap Roderic),
to whom Mr. Warner had discoursed concerning this exercitation of his
_De Circulatione Sanguinis_, and made no question but Dr. Harvey had
his _hint_ from Prothero. Memorandum:--Dr. Pell sayes that Mr. Warner
rationated demonstratively by beates of the pulses that there must be a
circulation of the blood.

When Mr. Hariot dyed, he made Sir Thomas Alesbury and Mr. Prothero
his executors, by which meanes his papers came to be divided into two
hands. Those which fell to Sir Thomas Alesbury, fell, after his death,
to his sonne-in-lawe, Edward, earle of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor, and
in his sonne's hands (this present, 1680, earle of Clarendon) 'tis
beleeved are those that are yet left; none of them were printed, save
that _Artis Analyticae Praxis_, which was printed by Mr. Warner
upon this occasion, viz. Sir Thomas Alesbury obtained of Algernon,
earle of Northumberland (son to that earle, prisoner in the Tower), a
continuation of the annuity, dureing Warner's life, upon condition that
he should, out of Mr. Hariot's papers, drawe out some piece fitt to be
published[1212], which he did, under the title aforesayd, in folio,
1631, London: but did not sett his name to it, and accordingly Warner
had his money as long as he lived. The other part of Mr. Hariot's
papers, which were in Mr. Prothero's keeping, came to the hands of the
lord John Vaughan, eldest son to the earle of Carbery, lately governor
of Jamaica, which vide.

Mr. Warner's youngest brother was a good husband and an industrious
man, and would say that had he so much money, he could improve it to
very great advantage; wherupon his eldest brother (Walter) did lett
him sell his land, by which meanes he did so improve his estate by
graseing, etc. that he became High Sheriff as aforesaid (quaere of the
attorneys when). Dr. Pell has seen him, and spake with him.

Mr. Walter Warner made an Inverted Logarithmicall Table, i.e. whereas
Briggs's table fills his margin with numbers encreasing by unites,
and over-against them setts their logarithms, which because of
incommensurability must needs <be> either abundant or deficient; Mr.
Warner (like a dictionary of the Latine before the English) fills the
margin with logarithmes encreasing by unites, and[1213] setts[C.] to
every one of them so many continuall meane proportionalls between 1
and 10[1214], and they for the same reason must also have the last
figure incompleat. These, after the death of Mr. Warner, came to the
hands of Mr. Herbert Thorndyke, prebendary of Westminster, and by him
left in the hands of Dr. Richard Busby, schoolmaster and prebendary
of Westminster, which, before Mr. John Pell grew acquainted with Mr.
Warner, were ten thousand, and at Mr. Warner's request were by Mr.
Pell's hands, or direction, made a hundred thousand. The difference of
the hands will shew the workman's in the originalls, which Dr. Busby
haz.

[C.] Vide my letter with Mr. Hooke's response, 1690.

Memorandum:--he wrote a Treatise of Coynes in relation to mint
affaires, of which Mr. John Collins haz a copie:--from Mr. Herbert
Thorndyke.

The sixth booke of Optiques in Merçennus is expressly his; the 7th is
Mr. Thomas Hobbs's.

Mr. Tovey, of Leicestershire, was his kinsman: he could tell when and
where he dyed:--from Seth <Ward>, bishop of Sarum.

The bishop thinkes he was of Cambridge university, but is not certaine.
Dr. Pell believes that he was of no university.

Quaere Dr. Pell, what is the use of those Inverted Logarithmes? for
W. Warner would not doe such a thing in vaine. Mr. Tovey was fellowe
of Christ College in Cambridge; was beneficed in Leicestershire; and
maried a neice of Mr. Warner's; and from Mr. Tovey they[1215] came to
Mr. Thorndyke.




=William Watson= (15--- 1603).


[1216]... Watson, who wrote the _Quodlibets_[1217], was taken in a
field by the Hay in Herefordshire (or Brecknockshire--vide the mapp) by
Mr. ... Vaughan, and was executed, at Brecknock (as I take it). 'Twas
observed that Mr. Vaughan did never prosper afterwards.




=George Webb= (1581-1641).


[1218]Dr. ... Webbe, one of king Charles I's chaplaines, afterwards
bishop of Limrick in Ireland, hath some sermons, or divinity, in print;
and a translation of Terence, English and Latin.

He dyed and was buried in Limrick about two or three daies before the
towne was taken by the Irish, who digged up the body again--it was
about 1642.

He was of Corpus Christi College, Oxon: borne at Brumhum in Wiltshire.

[1219]I confess I doe not like that super-zeale in the Canon Lawe, not
to let alone there the bodys of heretiques. It is too inhumane.--This,
as to the bishop's body being digged up again, which I feare was so:
for his nephew who was his archdeacon, was with him when he dyed and
the towne taken, and I remember, being then a fresh man, I heard him
tell the story. He was minister next parish to Mr. Hine.




=... Webb.=


[1220]Dr. Webb:--his way of teaching children, in Duck lane. It taught
them also to make verses. He wrote severall bookes--from Mr. Michael
Weekes: quaere +.




=John Wells.=


[1221]John Wells[CR], esq.:--he was borne at ..., educated at.... He
was a Roman Catholique. He published an excellent treatise of dialling,
entituled[1222]:--

Sciographia, or the art of shadowes, plainely demonstrating out of the
sphaere how to project both great and small circles upon any plane
whatsoever, with a new conceit of the reflecting of the sunne beames
upon a diall contrived upon a plane which the direct beame can never
shine upon, together with the manner of cutting the five regular
Platonical bodies and two other the one of 12, the other of 30 rhombes
never discovered heretofore, also the finding of their declinations and
reclinations and adorning them with variety of dialls, all performed
by the doctrine of triangles, and for ease and delight sake by helpe
of the late invented and worthily admired numbers called by the first
inventor logorithmes; by John Wells, esquire; London, printed by Thomas
Harper and are to be sold in Paul's churchyard at the signe of the
Bell, 1635.

Mr. Henry Gellibrand, professor of <Astronomy> at Gresham College, hath
put a learned preface to it, wherein it is mencioned that Mr. Henry
Brigges and Mr. Edmund Gunter did earnestly sollicite Mr. Wells to
publish it.

[1223]<In> Deptford <church at the> east end <of the> south aisle <on
a> white marble:--

                    Memoriae Sacrum.
        Hic sita est Catherina Welles, generosa,
       summae pietatis et virtutis, filia Thomae
        Wailinger armigeri et Benedictae Gonson
         primogenita, uxor charissima Johannis
        Welles armigeri pro regia classe pridem
       diribitoris ejusque navalium armamentorum
    per triginta plus annos totius Angliae generalis
       custodis, cui septem filios sexque filias
          feliciter enixa est, quarum duo nati
     tres natae hîc unâ cum illa contumulantur.
         Animam coelo pie reddidit 5 Julii 1634
      aetatis 47 felicem in Christo resurrectionem
                indubitanter expectans.
                Ad maritum superstitem.
    Pignora conjugii remanent tibi plurima nostri,
          Pluraque praemisit mors mihi dira rogo:
    Parte fruor tumulo, reliqua tibi prole relicta;
          Festina charos lentus ad hos cineres.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[CR] In MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 80ᵛ, Aubrey drew the coat:--'argent, a
chevron vert powdered with ermine spots of the first between 3
martletts sable,' but crossed it out with the note 'false.' On fol.
81 he gives a coat, as carved on the monument there described:--'or,
a lion rampart within a bordure engrailed sable, a crescent for
difference; impaling, gules, a fess verry between 3 (pheasants, I
thinke) or'; and adds 'the lord Wells tempore <Henr. VII> gave this
coate.'




=Sir George Wharton= (1617-1681).


[1224]Sir George Wharton, baronet, treasurer and paymaster to the
office of his majestie's Ordinance, dyed at his howse at Enfield, 12th
of August 1681, and lyes buryed in the Tower chapell, 25 of August
following.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

At the end of this note Anthony Wood has added the reference 'see p.
39b,' i.e. fol. 90ᵛ of the MS., where is the note--'Sir George Wharton,
baronet, obiit in Turri London, ubi sepultus est, Aug. 10th 1681.'
Wood has noted there 'in page 45,' i.e. fol. 97, ut supra, 'you say
12 August.' Aubrey there gives in trick the coat:--'<sable>, a maunch
<argent>, on a canton ..., a lion's gamb,' and adds 'sans bordure,
quod N.B.'--On fol. 9ᵛ of the MS. is still another version:--'Sir
George Wharton, knight, buryed at the Tower chapel (quaere), 26 August,
Friday, 1681'; and Wood there objects 'in page 45, you say 25 August:
see page 39b.'




=Diggory Wheare= (1574-1647).


[1225]Mr. Gibbon, Blewmantle, showed me in an old collection in MSS.,
ἀνονυμῶς, that in anno 1634 was the number of 92 students in Glocester
Hall, Degory Whear then master there.




=Abraham Wheloc.=


[1226]... Wheelock, <a> simple man--<from Seth Ward> bishop of Sarum.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

Abraham Wheloc printed notes on Bede, Camb. 1643. How thoroughly
Anthony Wood used up every scrap of opinion he received is shown by the
fact that even this expression (of Wheloc's 'simplicity') is taken up
by him: see Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iv. 258.




=Daniel Whistler= (1619-1684).


[1227]Dr. Daniel Whistler borne at Walthamstowe[1228] in Essex.

[1229]Daniel Whistler, M.D., dyed (May 11, 1684), president of the
Physitians' College.




=James Whitney= (1593-166-).


[1230]Parson Whitney was a great _nomenclator_ of Oxford men, being an
old fellow there; and were he alive now would be 81.

[1231]My old cosen, parson Whitney, told me that in the visitation of
Oxon in Edward VI's time they burned mathematical bookes for conjuring
bookes, and, if the Greeke professor had not accidentally come along,
the Greeke testament had been thrown into the fire for a conjuring
booke too.




=John Whitson= (1557-1629).


[1232]John Whitson, alderman of the city of Bristol. John Whitson was
borne at Cover in the Forest of Deane in the countie of Glocester.
He went to schoole at Bristow, where he made a good proficience in
the Latin tongue. He was bound apprentice to alderman Vawr, a Spanish
merchant of this city. He was a handsome young fellow; and his old
master the alderman being dead, his mistress one day called him into
the wine-cellar and bad him broach the best butt in the cellar for
her.... His mistresse after maried him. This story will last perhaps as
long as Bristol is a city.

He had a good naturall witt, and gaind by the Spanish trade a fair
estate.

His second wife was ... the daughter of ... Hine, alderman of London,
a very beautifull dame, as by her picture, at length, in the dining
rome, doeth appear. By her he had a daughter, his only child, who was
counted the flower of Bristol, who was maried to Sir Thomas Trenchard
of Dorsetshire, who dyeing (together with her child), the alderman gave
him compensation for the mannour of Dunderhill[1233] and had it again.

His third wife was ... by whom he had no issue. His fourth and last
wife was Rachel, daughter of Richard Danvers of Tokenham, Wilts, esq.,
relict of John Aubrey of Burleton in the county of Hereford, esq. (my
father Richard Aubrey being then eleaven yeares of age). He had no
issue by her. The alderman made him[1234] a good falkoner, but did cutt
downe his woods and never made him any satisfaction: but lett his good
workes be sett in balance against it.

He lived nobly; kept a plentifull table; and was the most popular
magistrate[1235] in the city, alwaies chosen a member of Parliament.
He kept a noble house, and did entertain and treat the peers and great
persons that came to the city. He kept his hawkes.

I remember five that had been bred-up under him, but not one of them
came to good, they lived so luxuriously, just as the servants of Sir
John Robinson, governor of the Tower.

He had a very good healthy constitution, and was an early riser; wrote
all his letters and dispatched his businesse betime in the morning.

He was charitable in his life in breeding-up of poor scholars:
particularly I remember William Haywood, D.D., whome he preferred
to St. John's Colledge in Oxon, where are[1236] certaine Bristowe
fellowships. His father was a cowper in Ballance Street; his mother,
whom I well remember, was a midwife in the city.

He had a fair[1237] house in St. Nicholas Street, where is the
stateliest dining roome in the city. He had been thrice mayor of this
city, as is to be seen in the table of mayors in St. Nicholas Street in
golden letters.

His beloved and only daughter dyeing, and so being _orbus_, Richard
Wheeler his nephew, who was bred a merchant under him with others, was
his heir; but he proving a sott and a capricious coxcombe, he setled
all his estate upon the city of Bristow for pious uses, and was, I
doe believe, the greatest benefactor that ever the city had. He gave
the mannour of Durdery and the mannour of Burnet and divers houses in
Bristowe.

He dyed about the seaventy-sixth yeare of his age by a fall from his
horse, his head pitching on a nail that stood on its head by a smyth's
shop. He was buried very honourably[1238]; besides all his relations
in mourning, he had as many poor old men (or men and woemen) as he
was yeares old in mourning gownes and hoodes, the mayor and aldermen
in mourning; all the trained band (he was their colonel) attended the
funerall and their pikes had black ribons and drummes were covered with
black cloath.

He lies interred in the west end of the 'Crowd' (the name of the vault
under all St. Nicholas Church, as St. Faith's was under St. Paule's),
where he lies in effigie on an altar-monument of alabaster and marble.
☞ See his inscription.




=Thomas Whyte= (1582-1676).


[1239]Memorandum:--Mr. John Davys of Kydwelly tells me that Mr. Thomas
Whyte (Blacklowe), author of _De mundo_, etc., dyed in Drury lane about
7 yeares since and is buried in St. Giles's Church in the fields.
Quaere ubi: as also where his brother Richard is buried?




=John Wilkins= (1614-1672).


[1240]Bishop J. Wilkins:--the little picture in 8vo <is> most like him.

[1241]John Wilkins, Lord Bishop of Chester; his father was a goldsmith
in Oxford. Mr. Francis Potter knew him very well, and was wont to say
that he was a very ingeniose man, and had a very mechanicall head. He
was much for trying of experiments, and his head ran much upon the
_perpetuall motion_. He maryed a daughter of Mr. John Dod (who wrote
on the Commandments), at whose house, at <Fawlsley, near Daventry>,
Northamptonshire, she laye-in with her son John, of whome we are now to
speake.

He had a brother (Timothy), squier-beadle of <Divinity> in Oxford, and
a uterine brother, Walter Pope, M.D.

He had his grammar learning in Oxford, (I thinke from Mr. Sylvester).
He was admitted of Magdalen-hall in Oxford, <1627> (vide A. Wood's
_Antiq. Oxon._) His tutor there was the learned Mr. John Tombs
(Coryphaeus of the Anabaptists). Anno Domini <1631> A.B.; Anno Domini
<1634> M.A. He read to pupils here, (among others, Walter Charlton,
M.D., was his pupill): he continued here ... yeares.

He has sayd oftentimes that the first rise, or hint of his rising, was
from goeing accidentally a courseing of a hare: where an ingeniose
gentleman of good quality falling into discourse with him, and finding
him to have a very good witt[1242], told him that he would never gett
any considerable preferment by continuing in the university; and that
his best way was to betake himselfe to some lord's or great person's
house[1243] that had good benefices to conferre. Sayd Mr. J. Wilkins,
'I am not knowne in the world; I know not to whom to addresse myselfe
upon such a designe.' The gentleman replied, 'I will recommend you
myselfe,' and did so, to (as I thinke) lord viscount Say and Seale
(quaere), where he stayed with very good likeing till the late civill
warres, and then he was chaplain to his highnesse <Charles Louis>
Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine, with whom he went (after the
peace[CI.] concluded in Germany[1244]), and was well preferred there by
his highnesse. He stayed there ... (not above a yeare).

[CI.] Quaere nomen loci.

After the Visitation at Oxon by the Parliament, he gott to be Warden
of Wadham Colledge. Anno <1656> maried to <Robina> the relict of Dr.
<Peter> French, canon of Christchurch, Oxon, and sister to Oliver,
(then) Lord Protector, who[1245] made him anno 165<8/9> Master of
Trinity Colledge in Cambridge, (in which place he revived learning by
strickt examinations at elections: he was much honoured there, and
heartily loved by all;) where he continued till 1660, (the restauration
of his majestie). Then he was minister of Saint Laurence <Jewry> church
in London; and anno ... was deane of Rippon in Yorkeshire. His friend,
Seth Ward, D.D., being made bishop of Excester, he was made there
deane, and anno 166<8> by the favour of George, duke of Buckingham, was
made bishop[1246] of Chester; and was extremely well beloved in his
diocese. Anno Domini <1672> he dyed of <the stone>. He left a legacy
of four hundred pounds (quaere) to the Royall Society, and had he been
able would have given more. He was no great read man; but one of much
and deepe thinking, and of a working head; and a prudent man as well
as ingeniose. He was one of Seth, lord bishop of Sarum's most intimate
friends. He was a lustie, strong growne, well sett, broad shoulderd
person, cheerfull, and hospitable.

He was the principall reviver of experimentall philosophy (secundum
mentem domini Baconi) at Oxford, where he had weekely an experimentall
philosophicall clubbe, which began 1649, and was the incunabula of the
Royall Society. When he came to London, they mett at the Bull-head
taverne in Cheapside, (e.g. 1658, 1659, and after), till it grew to big
for a clubb, and so they came to Gresham colledge parlour.


_Scripsit_ (vide A. Wood's _Antiq. Oxon._):--

The World in the Moone, ... (long since).

Swift and Secret Messenger.

Art of Praying and Preaching.

Mathematicall Magique: dedicated to the Prince Elector: printed....

Reall Character: London, printed....

This last was his darling, and nothing troubled him so much when he
dyed, as that he had not compleated it; which will now in a yeare
more be donne by the care and studies of Mr. Robert Hooke, of Gresham
College; Mr. Andrew Paschall, B.D. of Chedzoy, in com. Somerset; Mr.
Francis Lodwyck, of London, merchant; Mr. John Ray, R.S.S., of Essex;
and Mr. Thomas Pigott, M.A. (Wadham College). He lyes buried in the
north-east end of the chancell of St. Laurence ... church, neer the
wall, where will be an inscription sett up to his memorie.




=John Willis.=


[1247]John Willis, B.D.--author of the Art of Memorie, in Latin, 1618,
12mo.--Dr. Davenant told me that when he was of Cambridge, that one
preaching at St. Marie's--'and now,' said he (before he was aware) 'I
am come to the lyon's taile'; this was (it seemes) his _locus_[1248]:
the people stared on him.

Inventor of Short-hand,--'tis the best. Bishop Wilkins sayd, 'tis
only used in England, or by the English; and[1249] 'twas a good while
before the logarithmes gott beyond sea. Mr. Wingate first brought it
into France, and shewed it to them; scil. when he went into France to
teach the Queen-Mother English; he dedicated it to Monsieur the duke of
Orleans.




=Thomas Willis= (1621/2-1675).


[1250]Thomas Willis, M.D.--from himselfe--borne at Great Bedwyn in com.
Wilts, January the 27th, anno Domini 1621. His father was steward to
Sir Walter Smyth there, and had been sometime a scholar at St. John's
College in Oxford.

[1251]Thomas Willis, M.D.; vide Westminster Abbey pro inscriptione.

[1252]Thomas Willis, M.D., natus ...; (vide A. Wood's _Antiq. Oxon._).

1647 and 1648 (quaere, if not +), kept Abingdon-market[1253], and Dr.
<Richard> Lydall and he had a horse between them: this was before a
Doctor[1254]. He grew more and more into good practise.

He studied chymistry in Peckwater Inne chamber[1255]. He was in those
dayes very mathematicall, and I have heard him say his genius lay more
to mathematics then chymistry.

His father was steward to Sir John (I thinke) Smyth[1256]; and had a
little estate at Ivy Hinksey, where my lady Smyth (vidua) dyed.

He went to schoole to Mr. <Edward> Sylvester in Oxon, over the
meadowes, where he ayred his muse, and made good exercise:--from
William Hawes, his schoolefellow. Anno about 1657 (quaere there),
riding towards Brackley to a patient, his way led him thorough Astrop,
where he observed the stones in the little rill were discoloured of a
kind of _Crocus Martis_ colour; thought he, this may be an indication
of iron; he getts gaules, and putts some of the powder into the water,
and immediately it turned blackish; then sayd he, 'I'le not send my
patients now so far as Tunbridge,' and so he in a short time[1257]
brought these waters into vogue, and hath inriched a poore obscure
village. He was middle stature: darke red[1258] haire (like a red pig):
stammered much.

He was first servitor to Dr. <Thomas> Iles, one of the canons of Xᵗ.
Ch. whose wife was a knowing woman in physique and surgery, and did
many cures. Tom Willis then wore a blew livery-cloak, and studied at
the lower end of the hall, by the hall-dore; was pretty handy, and
his mistresse would oftentimes have him to assist her in making of
medicines. This did him no hurt, and allured him on.




=John Wilmot=, earl of Rochester (1648-1680).


[1259]John, earl of Rochester[CS]:--he went to schoole at <Burford>;
was of Wadham College, Oxford; I suppose, had been in France.

About 18, he stole his lady, <Elizabeth> Malet, a daughter and heir, a
great fortune; for which I remember I sawe him a prisoner in the Tower
about 1662.

His youthly spirit and oppulent fortune did sometimes make him doe
extravagant actions, but in the country he was generally civill enough.
He was wont to say that when he came to Brentford the devill entred
into him and never left him till he came into the country again to
Alderbury or Woodstock.

He was raunger of Woodstock-parke and lived often at the lodge at the
west end, a very delightfull place and noble prospect westwards. Here
his lordship had severall lascivious pictures drawen.

His lordship read all manner of bookes. Mr. Andrew Marvell, who was
a good judge of witt, was wont to say that he was the best English
satyrist and had the right veine. 'Twas pitty death tooke him off so
soon.

In his last sicknesse he was exceedingly paenitent and wrote a lettre
of his repentance to Dr. Burnet, which is printed.

He sent for all his servants, even the piggard-boy, to come and heare
his palinode[1260]. He dyed at Woodstock-parke, 26 July, 1680; and
buried at Spilsbury in the same countie, Aug. 9 following.

His immature death putts me in mind of these verses of Propertius:--

    Vere novo primoque in aetatis flore juventae,
      Ceu rosa virgineo pollice carpta, jaces.


[1261]_On the death of my lord Rochester: pastorall._

                                   1

    As on his death-bed, gasping, Strephon lay,
            Strephon, the wonder of the plaines,
            The noblest of th' Arcadian swaines,
    Strephon, the bold, the witty, and the gay,
    With many a sigh, and many a teare, he said,
    'Remember me, ye shepheards, when I'me dead.

                                   2

    'Ye triflying glories of this world, adieu!
            And vain applauses of the age!
            For when we quit this earthly stage,
    Beleeve me, shepheards, for I tell you true,
    Those pleasures which from vertuous deeds we have
    Procure the sweetest slumbers in the grave.

                                   3

    'Then since your fatall houre must surely come,
            Surely your head ly low as mine,
            Your bright meridian soon decline,
    Beseech the mighty PAN to guard you home.
    If to Elysium you would happy fly,
    Live not like Strephon, but like Strephon die.'

                                                    T. FLATMAN.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

[CS] Aubrey gives in trick the coat:--'<argent, on a fesse gules
between 3 eagles' heads, erased sable, 3 escallops or> [Wilmot];
impaling, azure, 3 escallops or [Malet],' surmounted by an earl's
coronet, and wreathed in laurel (for a poet). The top of fol. 55 has
been cut off, the writing on the recto side having previously been
scored out: I think the mutilation is due to Aubrey himself.




=Edmund Wingate= (1593-1656).


[1262]Edmund Wingate, esq., was a Bedfordshire man, I thinke; recorder
of Bedford--there you may learne, or at my lord Bruce's (now Alesbury).

_Scripsit_--Arithmetica;

  Logarithmotechnia, with solution of triangles;
  another little booke of working on a line of numbers;
  Abridgment of the Statutes,....

He was of Graye's Inne, and dyed.... His yonger sonne was Mr. <Fabian>
Stedman's fellow prentice; since turned a musquetere. He can tell me
everything. He did wayte at the Tower.

[1263]Edmund Wingate dyed at Mr. Bayles howse in Gray's Inne lane, and
was buried at St. Andrewe's, Holborne, the 13 Decemb. anno Domini 1656.




=George Withers= (1588-1667).


[1264]Mr. George Withers (vide A. Wood's _Antiq. Oxon._) was borne at
Bentworth, near Alton, in Hantshire, on the eleaventh of June, 1588.

He maried Elizabeth, eldest daughter of H. Emerson, of South Lambeth,
in com. Surrey, esqre, whose ancestors lye entombed in the choeur of
St. Savior's, Southwark, neer the monument of bishop Andrewes, with a
statue of white marble. She was a great witt, and would write in verse
too.

He was of <Magdalen College> in Oxford. He would make verses as fast
as he could write them. And though he was an easie rymer, and no good
poet, he was a good _vates_. He had a strange sagacity and foresight
into mundane affaires.

He was an early observator of _Quicquid agunt homines_; his witt was
satyricall. I thinke the first thing he wrote was 'Abuses whipt and
stript,' for which he was committed prisoner to ...[1265] (I beleeve,
Newgate). I believe 'twas tempore Jacobi regis. He was a captain in the
Parliament army, and the Parliament gave him for his service Mr. John
Denham's estate at Egham, in Surrey. The motto of his colours was, _Pro
Rege, Lege, Grege_.

After the restauration of his majestie he was imprisoned in the Tower
about three quarters of a yeare. He died the 2d of May, 1667, and lieth
interred within the east dore of the Savoy church, where he dyed. He
was pupill to bishop <John> Warner, of Rochester.

[1266]George Wythers, poet:--vide memorandum 1673 + μ de G. W.[1267]




=Theophilus Wodenote= (senior).


[1268]Theophilus Woodenoth[CT], B.D.--his father[CU] was a Cheshire
gentleman of that ancient family; was minister[1269] of Lankenhorn in
Cornwall, in which place his sonne succeeded him--

    'In Cornwall at a parish Lankenhorn
    Neer Launceston six miles southwards was I born.'

When I was a school-boy he[1270] lived two yeares with his brother ...
Peyton, vicar of Chalke, being obnoxious to danger of arests.

He did me much good in opening of my understanding; advised me to read
lord Bacon's Essayes and an olde booke of proverbs (English); answered
me my questions of antiq<uities>, etc.

He was an Eaton scholar and fellow of King's College, Cambridge,
contemporary with Dr. <Samuel> Colins.

He wrote in his solitude at Chalke a little manuall called 'Good
thoughts in bad times,' as I take it. I remember 'tis dedicated to his
cosen ... Wodenoth of Cheshire, esq.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[CT] Aubrey gives in trick the coat:--'<argent>, a cross couped and
voided <sable> [Wodenote].' Anthony Wood refers to his own 'Fasti
1619,' where he occurs among the Cambridge M.A.s incorporated at Oxford.

Theophilus Wodenote was of Eton, and King's Coll. Camb., B.D. Oxford
1623, and D.D. 1630; and rector of Linkinhorne, Cornwall, in 1615.

[CU] Thomas Wodenote, Fellow of King's Coll. Camb.; rector of
Linkinhorne, 1583.




=Theophilus Wodenote= (junior) (1625-16--).


[1271]Theophilus Wodenoth, pater, natus Lankenkorn neer Lanceston in
com. Cornub., Oct. 6, 1625, 6ʰ A.M., he thinkes on a Thursday. Now
rector of Blandford St Mary's in com. Dorset.

Charles, filius Theophili, Wodenoth natus Blandfordiae, Dorset, Feb.
17, 1660, die Solis[1272] circa 6ʰ A.M.


_Note._

FOOTNOTES:

This Theophilus Wodenote is son of Theophilus (senior). He matric. at
Exeter College, June 2, 1652.




=Thomas Wolsey= (147--1530).


[1273]Cardinal Woolsey:--Memorandum the Cardinal's hat on the scutcheon
at Christ Church: and quaere quot pedes from the College to the
Blew-boare; colour with soote the water-table, and insert in the
scutcheon the Cardinal's hat.

[1274]Thomas Wolsey[CV], Cardinal, was a butcher's son, of Ipswych, in
Suffolke; vide his Life, writt by....

He was a fellowe of Magdalen Colledge in Oxford, where he was tutor
to a young gentleman of Limmington, near Ilchester, in com. Somerset,
in whose guift the presentation of that church is, worth the better
part of 200 _li._ per annum, which he gave to his tutor, Wolsey. He
had committed hereabout some debauchery (I thinke, drunke: no doubt
he was of a high rough spirit), and spake derogatorily of Sir Amias
Paulet (a Justice of Peace in the neighbourhood), who putt him into the
stockes[CII.], which, when he came to be Cardinall, he did not forget;
he layed a fine upon Sir Amias to build the gate of the Middle Temple;
the armes of Pawlet, with the quartrings, are in glasse there to this
day (1680). The Cardinall's armes were, as the storie sayes, on the
outside in stone, but time haz long since defaced that, only you may
still discerne the place; it was carved in a very mouldring stone.

[CII.] From my cosen Lyte, of Lytes Carey, about a mile from
Limmington, 30 yeares since. The tradition was very fresh: I have
forgott his pupill's name.

Remaines of him shew that he was a great master of the Latin tongue;
Dr. John Pell tells me, that [he[1275] finds in a preface to a Grammar
of ... Haynes, schoolmaster, of Christ-church, London,] that 'twas he
that made the Accedence before W. Lilly's Grammar in ... dayes.

His rise (vide the History) was his quick and prudent dispatch of a
message to Paris for Henry 8.

He had a most magnificent spirit. Concerning his grandure, vide Stowe's
Chronicle, &c.

He was a great builder, as appeares by White-hall, Hampton
Court.--Eshur[CIII.], in Surrey, a noble house, built of the best
burn't brick (perhaps) that ever I sawe; stately gate-house and hall.
This stately house (a fitt pallace for a prince[1276]) was bought
about 1666, by ... a vintner, of London, who is since broke, and the
house is sold, and pulled downe to the ground, about 1678. I have the
draught of the house among my Surrey papers.--Quaere:--he had a very
stately cellar for his wines, about Fish-street, called Cardinall
Wolsey's cellar.--He built the stately tower at Magdalen Colledge in
Oxford, and that stately palace at Winchester (where he was bishop),
called Wolsey-house; I remember it pretty well, standing 1647. Now, I
thinke, it is most pulled downe.--His noble foundation of his Colledge
of Christ-Church, in Oxford, where the stately hall was only perfected
by him. There were designed (as yet may appeare by the building)[1277]
most magnificent cloysters (the brave designe wherof Dr. John Fell
hath deteriorated with his new device) to an extraordinary spacious
quadrangle, to the entrance whereof was carrying up a tower (a
gate-house) of extraordinary rich and noble Gothique building. Vide J.
Oweni _Epigrammata_:

    Sit domus imperfecta licet, similisque ruinae,
      At patet in laudes area lata tuas.

                                            OWEN, _Epigr._

[CIII.] Vide my Surrey notes <MS. Aubr. 4> if William Wanfleet did not
build it: both their scutcheons are there.

When the present great-duke of Tuscany was at Oxford, he was more
taken with that, then all the rest of the buildings he sawe there, and
tooke a second viewe of it.

It should not be forgotten what a noble foundation there was for the
chapell, which did runne from the Colledge, along the street as far as
the Blew-boare Inne; which was about 7 foot or more high, and adorned
with a very rich Gothique water-table[CW] as in the margin[1278].

It was pulled downe by Dr. John Fell (the Deane) about 1670, to use the
stones about the Colledge.

Memorandum:--about the buildings of this Colledge are frequent the
pillars, and axes, and Cardinall's cappes.

Concerning this great Cardinall's fall, see the histories of that time.

Returning to London from Yorke, he died at Leicester, where he lies
buried (to the shame of Christ-church men) _yet_ without any monument.

    'And though, from his owne store, Wolsey might have
    A palace or a colledge for his grave,
    Yet here he lies interr'd, as if that all
    Of him to be remembred were his fall.
    Nothing but earth to earth, nor pompous weight
    Upon him but a pebble or a quayte.
    If thou art thus neglected, what shall wee
    Hope after death that are but shreds of thee?'

                       Vide Dr. Corbet's Poems: his _Iter Boreale_.

See his life writt by ... and also by Thomas Fuller, B.D., in his Holy
State, where is a picture of his which resembles those in glasse in
Christ-church. He was a lusty man, thick neck, not much unlike Martyn
Luther. I beleeve he had Taurus ascending with the Pleiades, which
makes the native to be of a rough disposition.

He was Baccalaur of Arts so young, that he was called the
boy-bacchalaur. From Dr. John Pell (out of the aforesayd preface).

[1279]One of Osney bells is at Winslowe in Bucks, which is the great
bell there, but was the 3ᵈ at Osney; but they have not long since
cutt it something lesse, one Derby decieving them LX _li._ of their
metall. Cardinall Wolsey, being abbot of St. Alban's (to which Winslowe
did belong), at the pulling downe of Osney abbey, gave this bell to
Winslowe--Mr. Steevens[1280] was borne at Winslowe.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[CV] Aubrey gives in trick the coat:--'sable, on a cross engrailed
argent a lion passant gules between 4 leopards' faces or, on a chief
or a rose gules between 2 Cornish choughs proper,' ensigned with
Cardinal's hat and strings, gules.

[CW] Aubrey wrote 'a very rich Gothique ...,' and added a note in the
margin 'quaere Sir Chr. W<ren> _nomen_.' Wren told him 'water-table,'
which he then inserted in the text, striking out the marginal note.

In MS. Aubr. 3, fol. 4ᵛ, is the note:--'_Basis_, or _list_, or I
thinke they call it _the water-table_, of the parish church wall at
St. Edmundsbury in Suffolke. Of which fashion was the foundation of
that famous began chapell or cathedrall of Cardinal Wolsey's which went
towards the Blew-bore in Oxford, and pulled downe by deane Fell about
1671. Magdalen parish <-church> tower <Oxford> is also of this fashion,
viz. of Henry VIII.'




=Anthony Wood= (1632-1695).


[1281]Mr. Anthony à Wood, M.A., antiquarius, in his lettre to me, Palm
Sunday March 23, 1672, writes thus, viz. 'My nativity I cannot yet
retrive; but by talking with an ancient servant of my father's I find
I was borne on the 17 of Decemb., but the year when I am not certain:
'twas possibly about 1647.--John Selden was borne the 16 of December
and Sir Symonds Dews the 17. But of these matters I shall tell you more
when my trouble is over.'




=Sir Christopher Wren= (1631-1723).


[1282]Sir Christopher Wren[CX], surveyor of his majestie's buildings,
borne at ... Knahill[1283] in the parsonage-howse in the county of
Wiltes neer Shaftesbury, Thursday, October 20, 1631[CY], 8ʰ P.M.--the
bell rang VIII as his mother fell in labour with him (from himselfe).

He was knighted[CZ] at Whitehall on Friday, 14th November 1673, at 5ʰ
A.M. (from Mr. Robert Hooke, the next day).

[1284]Anno 1669, Dr. Christopher Wren was invited by the bishop of
Sarum (Seth Ward), where he made a particular survey of the cathedrall
church[DA]. He was at least a weeke about it, and a curious discourse
it was: it was not above two sheetes. Upon my writing _The Natural
History of Wilts_, I had occasion to insert it there, and they told me
that it was lent to somebody--they could not tell to whom. But in Febr.
last Mr. Cole thinks it not unlikely that Mr. Nash (the surveyor of the
fabrick) of Sarum may have that paper. I desired him to enquire but
have not yet received any answer.


<_Pedigree_: in MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 28ᵛ.>

  ... Wren, of Ipswych   _m._ ...
  in Suffolke.            |
                          |
                  ... Wren, a wealthy   _m._ ...
                  citizen in Cheapside   |
                  (quaere if not a       |
                  millener).             |
       +---------------------------------+-+
       |                                   |
  Matthew Wren,   _m._ ...      Christopher Wren,   _m._ ... Cox, of Funthill
  Lord Bishop      |            second son, deane    |   in com. Wilts.
  of Ely.          |            of Windsor           |
    +--------------+---------+                       |
    |                        |                       |
  Matthew Wren, secretary                            |
  to the Lord Chancellor                             |
  Hyde, then to the duke                             |
  of Yorke.                                          |
                             +-----------------------+-----------------------+
                             |                                               |
  Faith, daughter _m._ Sir Christopher _m._ <Jane> Fitzwilliams,             |
  of Sir Thomas             Wren.                     daughter of the lord   |
  Coghill of Blech-                                   Fitzwilliams in North- |
  ington in com.                                      amptonshire, second    |
  Oxon., first wife,                                  wife, A.D....          |
  A.D....                                                                    |
                                                                             |
                        +----------------------------------------------------+
                        |
                       ...   _m._    William
                              |      Holder, D.D.,
                              |      sub-deane of
                              |      the king's
                              |      chapel.
                              |
                          sine prole.


_Notes._

FOOTNOTES:

[CX] Wren was one of the people from whose patronage Aubrey, in his
evil days, hoped for some official post. On a slip pasted to fol. 27ᵛ
of MS. Aubr. 9 is this note:--

'Mr. Secretary Wren's indefinite (?) kindnesse is valuable if our lord
P. <? William lord Brouncker, Pres. Roy. Soc. 1663-1677> know it, and
Mr. <John> Collins, but _cave_. They might between them determine
somewhat certaine. There are peaceable places among souldiers; and now
the navy offices thrive, and a man can nowhere so well hide himselfe in
an office as there, 'cause 'tis out of the way.

'I cannot get Quillettus here, but would you could find _Gallus
Veridicus_, which you must enquire for privately. I never saw it, but
Mr. Oldenburg may possibly have heard of it.

'The want of the Royal Society is the greatest defect of our
parts[1285]: possibly you may have some one that for money will informe
mee as you doe for love. If you find any such, fix him for[1286] J.†'

[CY] Aubrey was anxious to obtain the exact date as an item towards
his pet astrological collection. But he fancied that Wren had played a
trick on him, by taking the place of a brother of the same name, one
year younger, who died in infancy. Aubrey might have reflected that,
while it is possible that parents might give the name of a deceased
child to their next, the other course is unlikely. The following
excerpts from Aubrey's letters to Anthony Wood bear on the point:--

(a) Nov. 17, 1670: MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 128:--'Dr. Christopher Wren
was borne at <East> Knoyle, baptized the 10th day of November 1631.
I have writt to him for the exact time, astrologiae ergo: 'tis a
poore-spirited thing, if he will not resolve me.'

(b) Jan. 16, 1671/2: MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 160ᵛ:--'Dr. Christopher
Wren ... tells me he was borne at ... Knahill 20 October, 1631. He was
a second Christopher: <the one> whome I sent to you was the first.'

(c) Feb. 1, 1671/2: MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 165:--'Dr. Christopher Wren
hath putt a trick on us, as it seemes; for he hath made him selfe a
yeare younger then indeed he is, though he needs not be ashamed of his
age, he hath made such admirable use of his time. I mett t'other day
accidentally with the parson of Knahill, who justifies the register,
and not only so but proves it by his neighbour that was his nurse and
her son that suckled with him--evidence notorious. 'Tis true, as the
Doctor sayes, that there were two Christophers, but it was the latter,
i.e. the Doctor--that parson Hill justifies--quod nota.'

[CZ] Aubrey several times notes this. MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5:--'Sir
Xpfer Wren knighted, November 14, 1673.' MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 7:--'Sir
Christopher Wren received the honour of knighthood at Whitehall on
Friday 14th November, 5ʰ A.M., 1673--from Mr. Robert Hooke, the next
day.'

[DA] MS. Aubr. 21, fol. 69-74, is 'A survey of Our Lady Church at
Salisbury, taken by Dr. Christopher Wren (since Sir Christopher) anno
Domini 1669, being invited downe to doe it by Seth Ward, lord bishop of
Sarum.'--Another, less perfect, MS. copy of this report is in Wood MS.
B. 14.




=Edward Wright= (15--- 1615).


[1287]Mr. Edward[1288] Wright: he was of Caius College in Cambridge
(from Sir Charles Scarborough, who was of that house).

He published his book, 4to, intituled[1289]:--

Certain errors in navigation detected and corrected by Edward Wright,
with many additions that were not in the former edition as appeareth in
the next pages, London, 1610.

It is dedicated to the high and mighty Henry, prince of Wales, etc. In
the Epistle dedicatory he makes mention of a goodlye and royall ship
that his highnesse lately built, and that since his highnesse comeing
into England that the 'art of navigation hath been much advanced here
as well in searching the North-east and North-west passages as also
in discovering the sea-coastes and inland of Virginea, Newfoundland,
Groenland, and of the North New-land as far as Hackluyt's headland,
within 9 degrees of the pole, also of Guiana and divers parts and
ilands of the East Indies, yea, and some parts also of the south
continent discovered by Sir Richard Hawkins.'

He read mathematicks to Prince Henry; and Sir Jonas Moore had the
wooden sphaere in the Tower, which was contrived by Mr. Wright for the
more easy information of the prince.

Amongst Mr. Laurence Rooke's papers (left with Seth <Ward>, lord bishop
of Sarum) I found:--

                      Hypothesis stellarum fixarum
                          a Edm.[1290] Wright,

three sheetes, of his owne hand-writing, in folio. I deposited it in
the Royal Society, but Mr. R. Hooke saieth that it is printed in a
booke by it selfe, which see.

In his preface to the reader he sayes that 'the errors I have in the
following treatise laboured to reforme to the utmost (yea, rather
beyond the utmost) of my poor abilitie, neglecting in the meane time
other studies and courses that might have been more beneficial to me:
which may argue my good will to have proceeded further to the amendment
of such other faults and imperfections as yet remain besides those
alreadie specified.'

It appeares by his preface that his worth was attended by a great deal
of envie.

_Ibid._--He was in the voyage of the right honourable the earle of
Cumberland in the yeare 1589. He 'devised the seaman's rings for the
present finding out both of the variation of the needle and time of
the day at one instant without any farther trouble of using any other
instrument, and hath farther shewed how by the sun's point of the
compasse (or magnetical azimuth) and altitude given by observation the
variation may be found either mechanically with ruler and compasse
or mathematically by the doctrine of triangles and arithmeticall
calculation.'

John Collins <says that> he happened upon the logarithmes and did not
know it, as maybe seen in his _Errors_: and Mr. Robert Norwood sayes
to the reader in his Trigonometrie 'neither is Mr. Edward Wright to be
forgotten though his endeavours were soonest prevented,' speaking of
the logarithmes.

He published a booke of dialling in 4to, anno....

[1291]Mr. Edward Wright, ex _Catalogo Bibl. Bodleianae_.

Description of the sphere in three parts, London 1613----W. 1. 7.

Treatise of dialling, London 1614, 4to----H. 30. Art.

Correction of errors in navigation, 4to----W. 16. Art., et London 1599,
4to----W. 2. Art. BS.

The earle of Cumberland's voyage to the Azores, _ibid._

Peruse the prefaces.--'The description of the sphaere' hath no preface,
and I believe they were his notes for Prince Henry.

[1292]Mr. Edmund[1293] Wright was of Caius Colledge, in Cambridge. He
was one of the best mathematicians of his time; and the _then_ new way
of sayling, which yet goes by the name of 'sayling by Mr. Mercator's
chart,' was purely his invention, as plainely doeth and may appeare
in his learned booke called 'Wright's Errors in Navigation,' in 4to.
printed A.D.... Mr. Mercator brought this invention in fashion beyond
seas.

He did read mathematiques to Prince Henry, and caused to be made, for
his Highnesse more easie understanding of astronomie, a sphaere of
wood, about three quarters of a yard diameter, which lay neglected and
out of order in the Tower, at London, and Sir Jonas Moor begd it of his
present majestie, who showed it to me.

He wrote 'Hypothesis Stellarum Fixarum et Planetarum,' a MS. of three
sheetes of paper, which I found among bishop Ward's papers, which I
gave to the Museum[1294] at Oxford.

He made a table of Logarithmes (scil. in his Tangents) before
Logarithmes were invented and printed, but did not know he had donne
it.--from John Collins.




=Edmund Wyld= (1616-16--).


[1295]Edmund Wyld[1296], esq., born at Houghton-Conquest in
Bedfordshire, 3ʰ P.M. on a Saterday, Oct. 10th, 1616.

He had the misfortune to kill a man in London, upon a great
provocation, about A.D. 1644. He had the plague in the Inner Temple,
1647, and had a grevous quartan ague in Sept. 1656.

Memorandum, Mr. Wyld sayes that the doctors told him that in 1656 there
dyed in London of the quartan ague fifteen hundred; N.B. In 1657[1297]
Oliver Cromwell, Protector, dyed of a quartan ague.

At Christmas, 1661, Mr. E. W. had a dangerous fever.




=... Yarrington.=


[1298]Capt. Yarrington dyed at London about March last[1299]. The cause
of his death was a beating and throwne into a tub of water.




=Anne, duchess of York= (16--- 1671).


[1300]Colonel Popham's great tankard, the dutches Y: dranke it (almost)
off at a draught.




APPENDIX I

NOTES OF ANTIQUITIES

    <Here and there in the _Lives_ Aubrey has jotted down notes on
    various matters of antiquarian interest. These are collected
    here, and a few other notes of the same type from other Aubrey
    volumes added to them. Aubrey attached to some of these notes
    the title of 'Nouvelles,' e.g. MS. Aubr. 8, foll. 6, 28ᵛ, 103.>


<_'Sir' = dominus_.> I remember, before the late warres, the ministers
in Herefordshire, etc. (counties that way), had the title of _Sʳ._,
as the bachalours of Art[1301] have at Oxon, as 'Sir Richard, of
Stretford,' 'Sir William, of Monkland.' And so it was in Wilts, when my
grandfather Lyte was a boy; and anciently everywhere. The example of
this appeares in the excellent comoedie of _The Scornfull Ladie_, where
'Sir Roger' (the chaplain) has a great part. It was made by Mr. J.
Fletcher about the beginning of King James' time; but in all old wills
before the reformation it is upon record.--MS. Aubr. 3, fol. 30.

<_The ways of the gentry, tempore Jacobi I._> In those dayes hunting
and falconery were at the height: old Serjeant Latham then lived, and
writt his falconry[1302]. Good cheere was then much in use; but to
be wiser then one's neighbours, scandalous and to be envyed at. And
the nobility and gentry were, in that soft peace, damnable prowd and
insolent.--MS. Aubr. 3, fol. 30.

<_Ghost-stories._> When I was a child, and so before the civill
warres, the fashion was for old women and maydes to tell fabulous
stories, night-<t>imes, and of sprights and walking of ghosts, etc.
This was derived downe from mother to daughter, etc., from the monkish
ballance, which upheld holy Church: for the divines say 'Deny spirits,
and you are an atheist.' When the warres came, and with them liberty
of conscience and liberty of inquisition, the phantomes vanish. Now
children feare no such things, having heard not of them, and are not
checked[1303] with such feares.--MS. Aubr. 3, fol. 30.

The first _pointe-de-Venice band_ that was worne in England was by King
Charles the first at his coronation. Now[1304], 'tis common.--MS. Aubr.
6, fol. 1ᵛ.

_Point-bands._ The first point-band worne in England was that which
King <Charles> IIᵈ wore when he was crowned: and presently after,
the fashion was followed infinitely:--from Mris Judith Dobson, vidua
pictoris[1305].--MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 11ᵛ.

_Apothecaries._ Sir Edward Coke, Lord Chief Justice of the King's
Bench, saies, as I remember, in the College of Physicians case,
that ... Falconti[1306], an Italian, was the first apothecarie in
London. But vide Sir Geofrey Chaucer, in his Prologue of the Doctor of
Physick, [s<ae>c.[1307] xiiiiᵗʰ, thus]:--

    'Full readie had he his apothecaries
    To send him drugg and electuaries.'

And Mr. Anthony à Wood shewes in his Oxon. Antiquities[1308] that there
was a place there, called _Apothecaria_, 300 yeares ago. In queen
Elizabeth's time the apothecaries did sell sack in their shoppes:
my grandfather[1309] and severall old men that I knew heretofore did
remember it.--MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 11ᵛ.

_Tabor and pipe._ When I was a boy, before the late civill warres, the
tabor and pipe were commonly used, especially Sundays and Holydayes,
and at Christnings and Feasts, in the Marches of Wales, Hereford,
Glocestershire, and in all Wales. Now it is almost lost: the drumme
and trumpet have putte that peaceable musique to silence. I believe
'tis derived from the Greek[1310] _sistrum_, a brasen or iron timbrel;
_cratalum_[1311], a ring of brasse struck with an iron rod--so we play
with the key and tongs.--MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 11ᵛ.

_Clocks_:--Chaucer, Nonne's Priest's tale--(Chanteclere).

    'Well sikerer was his crowing in his loge
    Then is a clock or in an Abbey an orloge.'

Sir Geoffrey Chaucer obiit 1400, aetatis 72.--MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 10ᵛ.

<The> clock[1312] at Paule's on the north crosse aisle west side
<is> stately. That at Welles is like it. Vide Chaucer in aliqua
vita[1313].--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 10ᵛ.

_Spectacles_[1314]. Dr. Pell tells me the antiquity of spectacles is
about two hundred yeares standing, and that they were sold, when first
invented, for 3 or 5 _li._ a paire. The ancientest author wherin he
finds them is cardinal Cusa--vide Cusanum, quaere Sir John Hoskins, who
(I thinke) knowes. ['Tis ... Redi, an Italian, about 400 yeares since.]
The Germans call them _Brill_, from the beril-stone, i.e. chrystall, of
which they were first made. Κρύσταλλος is not properly 'chrystall,' but
'ice.' Erasmus in Colloquio Senis--

            'Quid tibi vis cum vitreis oculis, fascinator?'

Vide Thomas Hobbes' Optiques in libro De Homine, where he interprets
this piece of Plautus, in Cistellaria, act. 1, scen. 1:--

       'Conspicillo consequutus 'st clanculum me usque ad fores,'

where he proves that there 'conspicillo' could not signify a paire
of spectacles, as we now use it: for then he could not have kenned
her at a distance. I remember he told me 'tis that which the French
call _vidette_, a hole to peepe out at.--Vide <Hier.> Sirturus _de
Perspicillis_, a thin 4to: Mr. Edmund Wyld has it, scil. a rarity.--MS.
Aubr. 6, fol. 11.

[Illustration]

_Gunnes._ The Almanack chronologie tells us (1680)--'Since _the
invention of gunnes_'--by ..., a monke of ..., in Germany--'270
yeares,' scil. in the reigne of <Henry IV>, anno 1410. Philip de
Commines tells us that in his time, when Charles 8 went into Italy,
the country-people flocked mightily to see the great gunnes shott
off, which was the first time they came in use: but musquetts and
fowling-peeces came not to perfection long after. Memorandum:--in
the Princes' Chamber at the House of Lords[1315], scil. the roome
where the king does retire, are very old hangings, viz. of Edward
the Fourth's time, in which is described the invention and use of
gunnes. The muskets there are only a long tube stop't at one end,
with a touch-hole, and fitted to a long staff. This gun one holds
on a rest and aimes; and then another comes with a lighted match in
a stick and gives fire, so that 'twas the worke of two men then to
manage one piece. Till the late warres refined locksmiths' worke, I
remember when I was boy the firelocks were very bungling to what they
now are. And in queen Elizabeth's time they used _calivers_, of which
I remember many in gentlemen's halls before the civill wars (for then
the soldiers converted them into carbines). The stock was like a wooden
basting-ladle, and it had a match-lock, and was not much longer then a
carbine.

'Cualibre' in French signifies the bore of a gun, or the size of the
bore; and (thence) also the size capacity or fashion of any such
thing--Cotgrave's Dictionary.--MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 11.

<_Printing._> Memorandum, in the librarie of Francis Bernard, M.D., in
London, behind Sepulcher's church, is Tulie's Offices ('tis printed
_Tulii_) in 4to, printed at Mentz by <Johann> Fust, 1466.--The sayd Dr.
sayes that he hath seen Saint Hierome on the Creed, printed at Oxford,
1467[1316].--Memorandum, Mr. ... Morris of Llansilly in Denbighshire
hath a manuscript Bible in Welsh 1500[1317] years old. It was found
at the dissolution of the monasteries in an old wall which parted the
monastery from the Bishop's Palace[1318] at Hereford, lap't-up in
lead, and the inscription on it doeth testifie the antiquitie of it.
'Tis thought 'twas hid and layd-up there when the great difference,
and troubles, was between the Welsh monkes and those of Austin the
monke:--from Mr. Middleton, <of> Denbighshire, merchant in London.
Quaere Mr. Meredith Lloyd de hoc: there may be something of trueth to
be pickt out in this storie.--MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 11.

_Catafalconi_ is the magnificent contrivance for kings' and princes'
and generalls' effigies to lie in state in some eminent church for some
weekes, e.g. King James Iˢᵗ; Robert, earle of Essex; generall Monke,
duke of Albemarle. It takes its name from 'Falconi,' which signifies in
Italian 'an eagle.'--Memorandum at the solemne funeralls of the Roman
emperors they had an eagle to fly away from the _rogus_ when it tooke
fire.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 3.

<_Stained glass in Oxford._> When I came to Oxford, crucifixes were
common in the glasse windowes in the studies' windowes[1319]; and in
the chamber windowes were canonized saints (e.g. in my chamber window,
St. Gregorie the great, and another, broken), and scutcheons with[1320]
the pillar, the whip, the dice, and the cock. But after 1647 they were
all broken--'downe went Dagon!' Now no vestigia to be found.--MS. Aubr.
8, fol. 3.

Mr. Fabian Philips sayes the winter 1625 before the plague was such a
mild winter as this[1321]: quod N.B.--MS. Aubr. 8, a slip at fol. 6.

Quaere Dick Brocas, prisoner in King's Bench, pro legier booke of
Bradstock abbey.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6ᵛ.

Quaere nomen ecclesiae unde deducebantur picturae Mri. Davys.--MS.
Aubr. 8, fol. 6ᵛ.

Oliver turned out the parliament, 20 Apr. 1653.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 5.

... Knox began his voyage to Tunquin, Aug. 18, 1681.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol.
5ᵛ.

_The first beginning of the Royal Society_ (where they putt discourse
in paper and brought it to use) was in the chamber of William Ball,
esqr., eldest son of Sir Peter Ball of Devon, in the Middle Temple.
They had meetings at taverns before, but 'twas here where it formally
and in good earnest sett up[1322]. In Dr. Spratt's History you may see
when the patent was granted.--MS. Aubr. 8, a slip at fol. 6.

<_Wiltshire._> Quaere Mr. <Thomas> Mariet and Mr. Packer (pro
Anthony Wood) if <there is> a camp neer Camden, and if another
on Broadway.--Memorandum ... <to put> my brother's notes of ...
Hyde, etc., into 'Liber[1323] B' before I send it to Anthony
Wood.--'Liber[1324] A' (preface)--the 'clerici' (i.e. parish priests)
did write the bayliffs' accounts and that in Latin, a specimen whereof
I have with me of....--MS. Aubr. 8, a slip at fol. 13.

<_Oxford._> Insert the shields in St. Ebbe's church at Oxon in 'Liber
B.'--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6ᵛ.

The _paper mill_ at Bemmarton, Wilts, is 112 yeares standing (1681).
'Twas the second in England.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 28ᵛ.

_Jessamines_ came into England with Mary[1325], the queen-mother;
_Laurell_ was first brought over by Alathea[1326], countesse of
Arundell, grandmother to this duke of Norfolke[1327].--MS. Aubr. 8,
fol. 28ᵛ.

Rider's <Almanack>, 1682:--'Since _tobacco_[1328] brought into England
by Sir Walter Raleigh, 99 yeares; the custome[1329] wherof now is the
greatest of all others and amounts yearly to....--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 103.

Rider's Almanack, 1682:--'Since Tobacco first used, 99 yeares; since
the New River was brought to London, 79; since _coaches_ were first
used, 128.'--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 28ᵛ.

The first _glasse-coach_ that came into England was the duke of Yorke's
when the king was restored. In a very short time they grew common,
and now (1681), at Waltham or Tottnam high crosse, is sett-up a mill
for grinding of coach-glasses and looking glasses (much cheaper,
viz.).--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 28ᵛ.

_Penny Post Office_, vide vitam R. Morey[1330]. Mr. Robert
Murrey began it in May 1680, and the duke of York seized on it in
1682[1331]--quaere about what time of the yeare? Let Mr. Murry goe to
Dr. Chamberlayne at Suffolke house.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 30.

<_The penny post._> Doe right to Mr. Murrey in a Memorandum as to the
refelling of Dr. <Edward> Chamberlayne who ascribes that invention or
project of the 1ᵈ post to W. Dockwray, which is altogether false.--MS.
Aubr. 8, a slip at fol. 13.

<_Printing._> Mr. J. Gadbury assures me that the first printing in
England was in Westminster Abbey. They yet retaine the name 'Treasurer
of the chapell.'--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 28ᵛ.

Mr. Theodore Haak saieth that the antiquity of _pinnes_ is not above
200 yeares. 'Before, they used a thorne, etc., _more primitivo_. He
saies moreover that he heard the Swedish ambassador asked two other
ambassadors what they thought was the greatest waste of copper. One,
said bells, another said cannons. 'No,' sayd he, ''tis pinnes'--quod
N.B.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 30.

_Shoes._ I doe remember, in my native county of North Wilts, husbandmen
did weare high shoes till 1633 common enough, scil. 1/2 bootes slitt
and laced. The Benedictine monks wore bootes, I beleeve, like these--at
least 1/2 bootes.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 30.

_Gentilisme_[1332]. Memorandum in Yorkeshire the country woemen doe
still _hailst the new mewne_, scil. they kneele with their bare knees
on a _grownd-fast stene_ and say _all haile_, etc. The moon hath a
greater influence on woemen than on men.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 69.

_Gentilisme._ Weddings out. Ovid's Fastorum lib. <iii. 397, 398>:--

    His etiam conjux apia sancta[1333] dialis
      Lucibus impexas debet habere comas--

see the two distiches preceding.

This St. Andrewe's crosse we wore on our hatts, pinned on, till the
Plott, and never since:--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 69.

_Avebury._ Between pages 1 and 2[1334] insert the scheme of
Avebury.--... miles westwards from Marleborough (not far from
Bristowe-roade) is a village called Avebury which stands within one
of the most remarkeable monuments of its kind in England. It seemes
strange to me that so little notice hath been taken of it by writers.
Mr. Camden only touches on it and no more.--MS. Aubr 9, fol. 50ᵛ.

<_Palm Sunday._> Antiquity--the fashion hereabout[1335] was before
the warres that on Palme Sunday the young men and maydes received the
communion, and in the afternoon walkt together under the hedges about
the cornefields, which was held to be lucky.--MS. Aubr. 21, fol. 2ᵛ.

<_Simples._> Some write that the water ..., vervayn, ..., ... of
sprinkled about the hall or place where any feast or banket is kept
maketh all the company both lusty and merry.--Dodoens _Herball_.--MS.
Aubr. 21, a slip at fol. 9.

_Witches_ (maleficae). Twisting of trees, tearing and turning up oakes
by the roots. Raysing tempests; wracking ships; throwing down steeples;
blasting plantes; dwindle away young children. To overlooke and binde
the spirits and phantasy; bewhattling and making men impotent, woemen
miscarry (countesse of Carlisle). Whirlewinds; haracanes.

Mr. Morehouse[1336]:--spirits in 'em. Bishop of Bahuse; the devill's
black mace of rammes hornes; the session, à la mode de Royal Society,
with ballotting box. Memorandum;--Sir H. B. <said> wise men alwaies saw
that as some malicious woemen increased in yeares, increased also in
malice: set howses on fire, mischiefe <to> children, etc. Thought it
better to have them underground then above ground and raise storms: the
familiars could not handsomely knock 'em in the head.--MS. Aubr. 21, p.
11.

<_Provincial ignorance._> Sir Eglamour and Fitz-ale <two of the persons
in Aubrey's Comedy _The Country Revel_> discourse of the gothique
manner of living of these gentlemen, of their ignorance, and envy of
civilized and ingeniouse men; of the promising growth of civility
and knowledge in the next generation[1337] (in our grandfathers' or
great-grandfathers' dayes few gentlemen could write a letter: then 'the
clarke made the justice'); that there is a sort of provinciall witt, or
rather a humour that goes for witt, e.g. in the west, which if used in
the north, or elsewhere, seemes strange and ridiculous.--MS. Aubr. 21,
p. 11.

_Summer watch._ Vide Sir Thomas Smyth's _Commonwealth_ de hac. Cause
is that the blood is then high: keepe downe the _juvenilis impetus_.
The old men in those dayes were not so ignorant in philosophy as the
virtuosi, forsooth, doe thinke they were. They knew, etc.--MS. Aubr.
21, p. 11.

<_Provincial manners._> Collect[1338] the gothicismes and clownrys
of ... in Chester. Dick Pawlet, Secole Chivers, W. Ducket's clan of
Clowne-hall. Their servants like clownes too, drunkards too: _qualis
herus, talis servus_; breeches of one sort, doublet of another, drabled
with the teares of the tankard and greasie. He built an alehouse for
his servants, without the gate, for convenience sake, because the
servants should be within call. (Before they came hither above a mile
for their ale.) Vide Osburne, of distinction of habitts.--MS. Aubr. 21,
p. 12.

_Country magique._ Walking about the church Midsomer eve at night,
one shall meet the party that shall marry. They must goe round the
church nine times (or seven times), with a sword drawne, if a man; if a
woman, with a scabbard.--To putt a smock on the hedge on Midsommer-eve
night, the man that is to have her shall come and turne it.--They take
orpin and stick branches of it on the wall, and fancy such a branch
for such a man, such a branch for such a woman, and divine their loves
and marriage or not-marriage by the inclining or aversion of the
branches.--They tye magicall knotts with certayne grasses, which, putt
in the bosome of the man or woman, if their love have not love for
them, will untye.--MS. Aubr. 21, fol. 24ᵛ.

<_Sketches for designed inventions_: MS. Aubr. 21, fol. 57: illustrated
in most cases by drawings. One (fol. 57) is for _a cart with one
wheel_, imitated from 'the slids in the forrest of Deane, for their
narrow wayes where carts cann't passe.'

[Illustration: 'A forrest cart']

Another (fol. 57ᵛ) is for _a balloon_:--'Fill or force in smoake into a
bladder and try if the bladder will not be carryed up in the ayre. If
it is so, severall bladders may drawe a man up into the ayre a certaine
hight, as the holly-berrys arise to the middle of water in a glasse.
Memorandum try to what hight they will ascend in a deep vessell, and
also try other berryes if any will doe so.'

Another (fol. 57) is for _a flying machine and parachute_:--'Memorandum
to propose that Mr. Packer sends to Norfolk or Suffolke to the
gentleman that hath with much curiosity measured the feathers in the
wings of severall birds and taken proportions of them and the weight
of their bodies, and to send to Mr. Francis Potter for his notions of
flying and of being safely delivered upon the ground from great heights
with a sheet, etc.'

Another (fol. 58) is for _sailing a ship_:--'Memorandum Dr. Wilkins his
notion of an umbrella-like invention for retarding a ship when shee
drives in a storm.'

Another (fol. 59) is for _a sowing-machine_:--'Let a ginne be invented
to shatter out corne by jogging in stead of soweing or setting, the one
being, too wastfull, the other taking up too much time; and that the
soweing and harrowing may bee but one and the same labour.'>

_Herifordshire._ All the earth red, as also all Wales from Severn to
the sea.--The twanging pronunciation more here then in South Wales; in
North Wales, not much. So about Newcastle they speak more of the Scotch
twang than they doe at Berwick or Scotland.--Get the song or speech
of serjant Hoskyns of the earl of Northampton, the Lord President
of Wales.--At Mordeford, the serpent with 6 or 8 wings, every ... a
paire.--Vide the little bookes of the old earl of Worcester[1339] in
12mo, where, amongst other things, he mentions a profecie by a bard of
Ragland, that it should be burnd or destroyed and afterwards be rebuilt
out of Redwood; set forth (vide), I thinke, by Dr. <Thomas> Bayly his
chaplain: where be many pretty romances of that earle, etc., his life
and death, etc. The same Dr. also writt a booke in folio (thinne)
called _Parietaria_: which see. He (or his father[1340]) would shoe his
horse. Was a great patron to the musicians, e.g. Caporavio, etc. This
duke's father[1341] had an excellent mechanicall head: quaere what he
writt: Mr. Wyld, I thinke, hath the booke printed in red.--MS. Aubr.
31, p. 68.

_Monmouthshire._ About the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's time Welsh
was spoken much in Hereford and I believe 100 years before that as far
as the Severn. It weares out more and more in South Wales, especially
since the Civill Warres (and so in Cornwall: Mr. Francis Potter did
see one that spake of a woman towards the farther end of Cornwall that
could speak no English)--but they still retaine their ancient way of
pronunciation, which is with a twang worse than the Welsh.--MS. Aubr.
21, p. 68ᵛ.

<_Dress._> Memorandum--anciently no bandes worne about their neckes,
but furre: as in old glasse pictures.--Memorandum till queen
Elizabeth's time, no hattes, but cappes, i.e. bonnetts.--Trunke hose in
fashion till the later end of King James the first.--About 90 yeares
ago[1342] (1670) noblemen and gentlemen's coates were of the fashion of
the bedells and yeomen of the guard, i.e. gathered at the girdle place;
and our benchers' gownes retayne yet that fashion of gathering.--MS.
Aubr. 21, fol. 95ᵛ.

By reason of fasting dayes all gentlemen's howses had anciently
_fishponds_, and fish in the motes about the howse.--MS. Aubr. 31, fol.
95ᵛ.

Heretofore _glasse windowes_ were very rare, only used in churches and
the best roomes of gentlemen's howses. Yea, in my remembrance, before
the civill warres, copyholders and ordinary poore people had none. Now
the poorest people, that are upon almes, have it. In Herefordshire,
Monmouth, Salop, etc., it is so still. But now this yeare (1671) are
goeing up no lesse then 3 glasse-howses between Glocester and about
Worcester, so that glasse will be common over all England.--MS. Aubr.
21, fol. 95ᵛ.

Memorandum--without doubt, before the Reformation there was no county
in England but had severall _glasse-painters_. I only remember one
poore one, an old man (Harding) at Blandford, in that trade.--MS.
Aubr. 21, fol. 95ᵛ.

_Riding at the quintin at weddings_ is now left in these partes[1343]
but in the west of England is sometimes used yet. I remember when I
learned to read English I saw one at Will Tanner's wedding sett up
at the green by Bownet howse by the pounde. Vide the masque of Ben
Johnson, wher is a perfect description of rideing at the quintin.
Quaere the antiquity and rise of it.--Memorandum I sawe somewhere
that rideing at the quintin is a remayn of the Roman exercise; vide
Juvenal[1344], Satyr vi. 248--

        Aut quis non vidit vulnera pali[1345]
    Quem cavat assiduis sudibus, scutoque lacessit
    Atque omnes implet numeros?

A quintin[1346] ('quintaine' in French).

(_a_) a leather satchell filled with sand.

(_b_) a roller of corne[1347] pitched on end in some crosse way or
convenient place where the bride comes along home.

(_c_) at this end the fellowes that bring home the bride give a lusty
bang with their clubbes or truncheons which they have for the purpose,
and if they are not cunning and nimble the sandbag takes them in the
powle ready to hitt them off their horses. They ride a full career when
they make their stroke.

(_a c_) a piece of wood about a nell[1348] long that turnes on the
pinne of the rowler (_e_).--MS. Aubr. 21, fol. 95.

_Chelsey Hospitall._ On Thursday morning, February the sixteenth
1681/2, his majestie layed the foundation stone of the college
appointed for the reliefe of indigent officers at Chelsey College.--MS.
Aubr. 23, fol. 20ᵛ.

<_Siamese twins_[1349].> May 19, 1680, about sun rising were borne at
Hillbrewers neer Ilminster in Somerset twinne sisters growne together
at the belley: christned Aquila and Priscilla. Quaere the judgment by
Dr. Bernard.--MS. Aubr. 33, fol. 92.

_Rollright stones._ Except 1, 2, the rest + - 4 foote[1350]; about
4-1/2; quaere quot[1351].--MS. Aubr. 23, a slip at fol. 92.

[Illustration: Roll-right stones]

<_Apparition_[1352].> 1679: as he was a bed sick of an ague, (he
awake--daytime) came to him the vision of a Master of Arts with a white
wand in his hand, and told him that if he lay on his back three howres,
viz. 10 to 1, that he should be rid of his ague. He was weary[1353] and
turned and immediately the ague came: after, he did not, etc., and was
perfectly well.--MS. Aubr. 23, a slip at fol. 100ᵛ.

<_Soap._> A Bristow-man living in Castile in Spain learn't their art
of making soape, which he did first set up in Bristowe about the yeare
1600. By this, alderman Rogers there gott a great estate, and Mr. ...
Broughton[1354] was the first that improved barren ground there with
the soape-ashes, now not uncommon.--MS. Aubr. 26, page 18.

A Bristow-man living in Castile in Spaine learnt their art of makeing
soape, which he first sett-up in Bristow, now (1681) 80 + yeares
since.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 28ᵛ.

<_The Fishmongers' Company, London._> To discover[1355] and find out
the lands concealed and embezilled by the Fishmongers' company, which
was to maintain so many scholars in Oxford and for the ease of poor
Catholiques in Lent. Mr. Fabian Philips tells me I may find out the
donation in Stow's Survey of London: he can put me in a way to help
me to a third or fourth part for the discoverie. J. Collins, who
enformed me of this discovery, sayd the lands are worth some thousands
per annum, scil. two or three thousand pounds per annum, which
devout Catholiques in ancient times gave to this company for their
pious and charitable use. My lord Hunsdon would be a good instrument
herein. Memorandum in the records of the Tower are to be found many
graunts, etc., to the Fishmongers' company. Edmund Wyld; esq., saith
that the old Parliament did intend to have had an inspection into
charitable uses. See Sir Richard Baker's Chronicle pag. 267 G, anno
22 Henry VII <1507>, scil. Thomas Knesworth, mayor of London, gave
to the Fishmongers' company, certain tenements for which they are
bound to allow fower scholars, that is to say, two at Oxon, and two
at Cambridge, to each of them fower pounds per annum, as also to poor
people prisoners in Ludgate something yeerely. Quaere Anthony Wood de
hiis.--MS. Aubr. 26, page 1.




APPENDIX II

AUBREY'S COMEDY OF RESTORATION MANNERS


    <While hiding from the bailiffs in 1671 at Broad Chalk, Aubrey
    (see i. 52) set himself to compose a comedy descriptive
    of country life as he had seen it, abating nothing of its
    grossness, and concealing nothing of its immorality. The rude
    draft of this comedy is found in MS. Aubrey 21, written in the
    blank spaces and between the lines of a long legal document.

    Although few of the scenes are sketched, and fewer completed,
    it is possible to form an idea of the scope and plot of the
    piece.

    The jumbling together of all classes of society in the rude
    merriment of a country wake was designed to bring out the
    follies and vices of them all. A few gentlemen and ladies
    of the old school, of courtly manners and decent carriage,
    were brought in to set out by contrast the boorishness,
    the insolence, and the mad drunken bouts of Aubrey's
    contemporaries. A mixed company of sow-gelders, carters,
    dairy-maids, gypsies, were to give evidence, in dialogue and
    song, of the coarse talk and the vile ideas of the vulgar. And
    a still more disreputable rout of squires who had left their
    wives and taken up with cook-maids, and of heiresses who had
    run away with grooms, was to exemplify the degradation of the
    gentry. In several cases, over the names of his _Dramatis
    Personae_, Aubrey has jotted the names or initials of the real
    persons he was copying.

    The plot was to have a double movement; on the one hand, the
    innocent loves of a boy and girl of gentle birth, living in
    disguise as shepherd and dairy-maid, the 'Lord and Lady of
    the Maypole,' and, on the other hand, the fortunes of an
    adulteress, pursued by her husband, following her paramour
    in page's attire, jealous of his attentions to other women,
    ending in murder all round--'Raynes[1356] comes and invades
    Sir Fastidious Overween, and is slayne by him; and then Sir
    Fastidious neglects her; she comes and stabbes him, and then
    herselfe.'

    The scene, on the title-page, is laid, for a blind, at 'Aldford
    in Cheshire, by the river Dee, St. Peters day, 1669'; but in
    act i, scene 1, Aubrey, laying pretence aside, places it on
    'Christian Malford green' in his own district in Wiltshire,
    near Kington St. Michael, Draycot Cerne, etc.

    Taken as a whole, both in what is written out and in the
    anecdotes collected to be worked into the plot, the comedy
    affords a terrible picture of the corruption of Aubrey's county
    and times. It may be compared with the society pictures in Anne
    Brontë's _The Tenant of Wildfell Hall_.

    Two scenes, of the less offensive ones, may serve to give
    a faint idea of this curious piece of seventeenth century
    realism.>




[1357]THE COUNTREY REVELL.

=Act II, scene iii.=


    A faire roome. Enter Sir Eglamour, Lady Euphrasia, Lady Pamela:
    to them, Sir Eubule Nestor; then, squire Fitz-ale.

_Sir J. Fitz-ale._ Sir Eglamour, your most humble servant.

_Sir Eglamour._ Sir John Fitz-ale, the welcomest man alive.

_Fitz-ale._ Save you, ladies! I'm come to wayte on you at the famous
revell here, to help celebrate the festivall of St. Peter.

_Ladyes._ Most kindly donne, Sir John! We heard you strictly kept his
virgil last night at Justice Wagstaff's.

_Fitz-ale._ So strickt that none of us have been a-bed to-night, that's
the trueth on't. I beleeve, since the Conquest, St. Peter had never a
merrier eve observed.

_Ladyes._ Pray, Sir John, favour us to let us heare some of the mirth.

_Fitz-ale._ Why, ladies, yesterday we Cheshire gentlemen mett at a
barrell of ale at the bull-ring where we sufficiently bayted both bull
and barrell; and having well dranke there, staved and tayled, till 5
a-clock i' th' afternoon, wee were invited to the Justice's; where
being come into the great hall wee mett for a good omen the servants
labouring at heaving into the cellar a teirce of French wine, newly
brought by the barge from Chester. Faith! we had a frolique, and voted
it (_nemine contradicente_) to have itt sett abroach in the midest
of the hall. To worke we goe, and we four knights mount the tierce,
bestride it, like the _quarter files_[1358] _d'Amond_ upon one horse.
Then we dranke his Majestie's health, the Queen's, and the royall
family: then, faire ladies, (_he bowes_) your two healths; then, our
mistresses: then, God knows who--till the cooke knockt for supper. So
the tierce was reprieved till after supper, a guard sett over it. As
wee were going to sitt downe to supper in the parlour a sudden quarrell
arose between Sir Fastidious Overween and Captain Quarelsome about
precedency. To cuffs they fell, all in confusion; the ladies cryed out,
Sir Fastidious' great periwig was throwne into the fire and made an
abominable stinke.

_Sir Eubule_[1359]. Blesse me! What unheard of rudenesse! This to be
donne at a gentleman's house and by gentlemen, senators, parliamentary
justices of the peace!

_Sir J. Fitz-ale._ In this scuffle the chiape of Capt. Quarelsome's
sword hitcht in the cubboard of glasses: downe came all the glasses
of the butler with a most dreadfull esclate. But this is not all--the
cross-bar[1360] of Sir Fastidious' sword hitchd in my old ladie's vaile
and pluckt it off, together with her periwig, and showed her poor bald
old death's head.

_Sir Eubule._ Lord blesse me!

_Sir J. Fitz-ale._ The Justice and I struck in between 'em and parted
'em, and, with something more trouble then staving and tayling dog and
bull[1361], they were reconciled and sate down opposite to each other.
To a noble supper we sate downe.

After supper desert was brought. My country gentlemen catcht and
snatchd like schoolboies and gobbt up the sweetmeats like ducks,
and.... And being very drunke, some putt even marmalade into their
pocketts. A noble carpet in the parlour trayled on the ground, which
with their dirty bootes they made the faire edge and bordure as dirty
as a woman's saddlecloth.

Supper being ended, faith! the justice would have the tother bout
at the butt for a confirmation of friendship[1362] between the two
antagonists. I could not refuse to help carry on such a good worke of
charity. So we drank friendly on till 2 a-clock i' th' morning. By that
time you may well thinke our braines were well warmd. We sung[1363],
hooped, hallowd, jubilled--set the cennell of hounds all in a larum. We
had the wenches and all the servants of the house to participate in the
great jubilee.

Well, about daybrake 'twas the generall vote for the unhinging of the
cellar dore and throwe it from the precipice of the cliffe into the
Dee. The good old dore, that haz turnd on his hinges for these two
centuries of yeares in the dayes of his hospitable ancestors, was taken
downe, and by four tall fellowes borne to the cliffe. Hautboies[1364]
loud musique playd before; the bearers followed; and then came the
chiefe mourners, the butler, brewer, and pantler, weeping with
blubbered eies for the decease of that had turnd out and doubled in the
dayes of his hospitable ancestors:--'it was an ill omen[1365] of the
fall of that ancient family.'

_Sir Eubule._ And they sayd well. I knew their Justice's grandfather
and great grandfather too. <They> kept 12 men in blew coates and
badges. We had no such doings in their daies. They were sober, prudent;
kept good well-ordered hospitality. We are like to have a fine world
when Parliament men and Justices shall give such lewd example....

_Fitz-ale._ Well! after the mourners, we came with our levetts[1366]
and clarions. Then the rest. We had the sowgelder there, who loud
performes the thorow-base. The dogges tooke it in turne too along the
river into Chester, and sett all the dogges there barkeing.

_Ladies._ I warrant the country people thought you mad--

(_Sir Eubule_[1367]: And well they might, by my troth!)

--or that there was an insurrection of the fanatiques.

_Fitz-ale._ My tall lads[1368] hand downe the dore, and committ it from
the cliff to the deepe. Downe, downe, it falls; but yet with severall
bounds it made as with disdaine to be at last so servd for's long and
faithfull service. Into the river Dee down dash it[1369] fell and away
towards Chester swimmes, but seemed to give a[1370] mournefull _je n'
scay quoy_

                and, as sighing, seemed to say
    Those that I trusted do my trust betray!

    'Not Orpheus' harp did swimme more solempnely!
    The Thracian dames that Orpheus did discoup,
    Whose head and harpe they into Hebrus flang,
    Were not with greater rage possest, then we!'

_Lady Euphrasia._ I swear, Sir John, you have made a very
poetical[1371] description of it.

_Sir J. Fitz-ale._ Ah! I steepd[1372] my muse last night in Aganippe.

_Sir Eubule Nestor._ Ah! the Justice now may well be said to keepe an
open howse.

_Sir J. Fitz-ale._ Sir Eglamour, the Justice intends to wayte on any
ladies come and dine with you. Sir Fastidious and the Captaine comes
with him; as also the bull-bayters, his old companions of the tappe;
neither witt nor learning; impudent swearers; bestiall drinkers, a
peck at a draught; hacking blades; huge colosses, with long swords,
horse-skin belts; old reformados of Charles the first; sad wretches;
old cinque-quaters; bacon[1373]-fac't fellowes; centaures that looke
as if they could not prove the Christian; downe their
beardes[1374] ... and dyed with mundungus[1375]. Now, ladies, looke to
yourselves, for every one will have a smack at your lipps with their
unsanctified mustaches.

_Ladies._ Bless us! I'le not come neer 'em, if they be such.

_Fitz-ale._ The Justice and's myrmidons are to drinke up 1000 of ale at
mother Mackerell's.

_Sir Eubule_--drinke as in the dayes of Pantagruel.

_Fitz-ale._ Plato saies perpetuall drunkennesse is the reward of virtue.




[1376]THE COUNTREY REVELL.

=Act III, scene iii.=


    An alehouse bower. Enter Mris. Maquerell, Justice Wagstaffe,
    Sir John Fitz-ale, Captain Exceptious Quarrellsome, Sir
    Fastidious Overween, the sowgelder, and Sir Hugh the vicar,
    myrmidons.

_Justice Wagstaffe._ Mother Margery, a merry revell to you! I am come
to see you according to custome.

_Margery._ I thanke your worship. You are my old guest and
acquaintance, and that does stand my friend with the excisemen.

_Sir Fastidious._ Prithee, give us a cup of the best revell ale. We are
come to drinke not less then 1000 of ale before we goe.

_Justice Wagstaffe_ (sings).

                   Come, fill us a 1000 jugges, etc.

_Margery_ (curtsies). Mr. Justice Wagstaffe, a good health to your
worship!

_Wagstaffe._ I thanke thee, Margery.--How doest doe Peg[CIV.]? First,
I must have a kisse. Come, let's fancy her 1/2 a crowne a piece. She's
a good-natured girle.--[They give.]

[CIV.] Peg, her mayd or daughter.

_Sir John Fitz-ale._ Sir Hugh, drink to the king's health. [Sir Hugh
takes off his glasse _super naculum_.]

_Sir J. Fitz-ale._ Bravely done, parson!--a true spunge of the Church
of England, i' faith.

_Sir Hugh._ I'm one of the old red-nosd clergy, orthodox and canonicall.

_Sir J. Fitz-ale._ You helpe solemnize the revell.

    <In MS. Aubr. 21, p. 20, Aubrey jots down an anecdote for
    use here 'All the parsons herabout,' in Wiltshire, 'are
    alehouse-hunters. J<ames> L<ong>, esq., hunted Sir Hugh
    driefoote to the alehouse with his pack of hounds to the great
    griefe of the revered divine.'>




INDEX


  Abbot, abp. Geo., i. 24; ii. 26, 194.
    Bp. Rob., ii. 26.
    Wolston, ii. 260, 261.

  Abingdon, Berks, i. 184, 185, 244; ii. 303.

  Abingdon, (Bertie, lord Norreys), earl of--
    -- James, 1st earl, i. 45, 53, 98, 192; ii. 9, 31.
    ---- Eleanor (Lee), co. of, ii. 30-32.
    -- Montague, 2nd earl, ii. 31.
    -- Willoughby, 3rd earl, i. 98.

  Ailesbury, _see_ Aylesbury.

  Aiton (Ayton), Sir John, i. 26.
    Sir Rob., i. 25, 332, 365.

  Albemarle, duke of, _see_ Monk, Geo.
    ---- Anne (Clarges), duchess of, ii. 73, 76, 77.

  Albiis, Thos. de, _see_ White.

  Alcorne, Rich., i. 8.

  Aldington, Kent, i. 248.

  Aldsworth, Mr., i. 15, 26.

  Alençon, François, duc d', ii. 217.

  Alesbury, _see_ Aylesbury.

  Alesly, Jas., ii. 71.

  Aleyn, _see_ Alleyn.

  Alford, Sir Thos., ii. 219.

  Allam, Andr., ii. 72.
    Thos., i. 182.

  Allen, H., i. 310.
    Thos., i. 26-28, 84, 225, 318.
    Mr., ii. 209.

  Alleyn (Aleyn), Chas., i. 29.

  Alsop, Dr., i. 296.

  America, i. 175, 177, 307, 310; ii. 103.
    -- alphabet for native language, i. 285.
    -- Barbadoes, i. 210.
    -- Bermudas, i. 41; ii. 97, 276.
    -- Davis strait, i. 210.
    -- Guiana, ii. 95, 183, 187, 188, 314.
    -- Jamaica, i. 50, 53; ii. 292.
    -- Maryland, i. 143.
    -- Mexico, i. 137.
    -- Newfoundland, ii. 314.
    -- New York, ii. 127, 128.
    -- Pennsylvania, i. 45; ii. 133, 134, 138.
    -- Plantations, the, i. 53, 210; ii. 160.
    -- Tobago, i. 45, 53.
    -- Virginia, i. 207, 285, 287; ii. 49, 100, 104, 160, 262, 314.

  Ampthill, Beds., i. 312; ii. 35.

  Amsterdam, i. 331, 364, 376, 421; ii. 122, 130, 131.

  Anderson, Sir John, i. 116.
    Mr., i. 115, 116; ii. 138.

  Andrewes, bp. Lanc., i. 29; ii. 2, 115, 232, 306.

  Anne, consort of Jas. I, i. 25, 251, 254; ii. 14, 35.

  Anstey, Mr., i. 220.

  Anthony, Franc., i. 32.

  Apothecaries, ii. 59, 318.

  Aquapendente, H. Fabr. ab, i. 296, 304.

  Arabic, i. 121; ii. 122, 224.

  Archangel, ii. 90.

  Archer, Thos., i. 32.

  Archimedes, ii. 126.

  Arderne, Jas., i. 290, 294.

  Aristotle, i. 300, 357, 359, 360; ii. 201, 211, 212.

  Arundel Castle, Sussex, i. 172; ii. 134.

  Arundel, Thomas Howard, 14th earl, i. 75, 301, 407; ii. 110, 112, 323.
    ---- Aletheia (Talbot), co. of, ii. 323.

  Arundell, Will. (?), i. 129.

  Arundell of Wardour, Thos., 2nd baron, i. 129.

  Ashindon (Escuidus), John, i. 16, 33.

  Ashmole, Elias, i. 33, 163, 285, 298, 426; ii. 33, 92, 109, 113, 114,
        175, 189-191, 193, 238.
    -- MSS. and books in his hands, i. 26, 27, 33, 44, 59, 211, 212,
        224, 229, 262, 318; ii. 33, 92, 108, 201, 247.
    -- His _Theatr. Chem. Brit._ cited, i. 147, 162-170, 210; ii. 202.

  Ashton, John, i. 385.
    Sir Thos., i. 104.

  Aspeden (Apsten), Herts., ii. 284, 290.

  Aston, Sir Walt., i. 239.

  Astrop, Northts., ii. 303.

  Atkins, Sir Edw., i. 58, 60.
    Sir Rob., i. 106.
    Ald., ii. 46.

  Atwood, Rich., i. 195.

  Aubrey, John, i. 34-53, and _passim_.

  Aubrey, Deborah, _mother_ of John, i. 33, 39-50.
    Edw., i. 56, 57, 59, 60.
    John, _grandfather_, i. 49, 51, 56, 59, 60; ii. 298.
    Sir John, i. 315; ii. 5, 7, 8, 154, 171, 268.
    Lewis, ii. 7, 8.
    Mary, ii. 154.
    Rachel, _grandmother_, i. 56; ii. 298.
    Rich., _father_, i. 37, 38, 42, 46, 49-52; ii. 249, 298.
    Thos., i. 56, 57, 59, 60.
    Sir Thos., ii. 7.
    Thomas, _brother_, i. 49, 95; ii. 54, 90, 161.
    Wilgiford, _great-grandmother_, i. 55, 60, 61.
    Sir Will., i. 59.
    Dr. Will., _great-grandfather_, i. 22, 49, 51, 53-66, 211; ii. 48.
    Dr. Will., of Ch. Ch., Oxon., i. 59.
    Will., _brother_, i. 49, 193, 304, 323-328, 386, 389; ii. 260, 323.

  Augur, Mr., i. 112.

  Austin, Mr., ii. 108.

  Avebury, Wilts., ii. 325.

  Avon river, Som., i. 123.

  Aylesbury, Sir Thos., i. 187, 188, 286; ii. 16, 291, 292.

  Aylesbury, Rob. Bruce, 1st earl, ii. 305.
    Thos., 2nd earl, ii. 35.

  Aylmer, Brabazon, i. 88, 92.

  Ayton, _see_ Aiton.

  Azores, ii. 315.


  Babel (Babylon) hill, Dors., i. 188.

  Babylon, i. 154.

  Backhouse, Sir Will., i. 318.

  Bacon, Francis, i. 22, 36, 66-84, 130, 132, 177, 180, 196, 224, 288,
        299, 331, 341, 348, 371, 375, 393, 394, 395; ii. 181, 194, 301,
        307.

  Bacon, Anne, i. 76.
    Anth., i. 76, 81.
    Eliz., i. 77.
    Sir Nich., i. 68, 69, 76, 77, 81, 238.

  Bacon, Friar Rog., i. 84, 165, 184, 187, 244.

  Badd, Sir Thos., i. 84.

  Badminton, Glouc., ii. 155.

  Bagford, Mr., ii. 94.

  Bagshawe, Edw., i. 85, 99, 187, 290; ii. 171, 261.

  Baker, Mr., ii. 90, 254, 255.

  Ball, John, ii. 153.
    Sir Peter (Justice), ii. 180, 185, 231, 322.
    Will., i. 355; ii. 322.

  Baltimore, Geo., and Cecil (Calvert), 1st and 2nd baron, i. 143.

  Balzac, Jean L. G., i. 14, 66, 86, 158, 282, 348.

  Bancroft, abp. Rich., i. 86.

  Bankes, Sir John, i. 269.
    Sir Ralph, ii. 48.

  Baramore, _see_ Barrymore.

  Barclay, John, i. 22, 86.
    Rob., i. 86.

  Barker, Will., i. 385.

  Barlow, bp. Thos., i. 148, 212; ii. 259.

  Barnes, Jos., ii. 25.

  Barrow, Isaac, M.D., i. 93.
    Isaac, of Spinney Abbey, Cambr., i. 87, 93.
    Isaac, bp. of St. Asaph, i. 93; ii. 257, 258.
    Isaac, Master of Trin. Coll., Cambr., i. 3, 87-94, 208, 372.
    Phil., i. 93.
    Thos., i. 87, 88, 89, 93, 94.
    Dr. ..., i. 94.

  Barrymore, David Barry, 1st earl of, i. 118.
    ---- Alice (Boyle), co. of, i. 118.

  Basket, Rev. ..., i. 158.

  Basset, Will., ii. 171.

  Bastwick, John, ii. 174.

  Batchcroft, Thos., i. 94.

  Bate (Bates), Geo., i. 95; ii. 176.
    John, i. 36, 51.

  Bath, Som., i. 40, 123, 169, 176, 251, 279; ii. 173, 174, 176, 186,
        240-244.

  Bath, John Granville, 1st earl of, ii. 76, 77[1377].

  Bathurst, Geo., i. 28, 29, 300.
    Ralph, i. 52, 150, 210, 371, 377; ii. 11, 16, 17, 24, 141, 158,
        206, 288.
    Mr., ii. 19.

  Battering-ram, i. 98.

  Baxter, Rich., i. 86, 373; ii. 259.

  Bayes, Mr., i. 256.

  Bayly, Thos. (N. I. H.), i. 364.
    Thos., ii. 328.

  Baynton, Sir Edw., ii. 45, 244.

  Beach, Mr., i. 133-135.

  Beaconsfield, Bucks., ii. 274, 277, 279.

  Beaudley, Worc., ii. 259.

  Beaufort, Henry Somerset, 1st duke of, ii. 155, 328.

  Beaumont, Francis, i. 22, 95.

  Becket, Berks., ii. 43, 47.

  Bedford, Jasper Tudor, duke of, i. 315.

  Bedford (Russell), earl of--
    -- Fran., 2nd earl, i. 175, 177.
    -- Fran., 4th earl, i. 275; ii. 78.

  Bedwell, Will., i. 96.

  Bee, Corn., i. 279, 281.

  Beech, _see_ Beach.

  Beeston, Will., i. 96; ii. 14, 227, 233, 245.

  Belvoir, Leic., i. 230.

  Bemerton, Wilts., i. 309; ii. 323.

  Bendish, Sir Thos., i. 90.

  Benese, Rich., i. 97.

  Bennet, bp. Rob., i. 418.

  Bere, Dors., ii. 89.

  Berkeley, Miss, i. 98.

  Berkhampstead, Herts., ii. 1.

  Bermudas, ii. 341.

  Bernard, Chas., i. 356.
    Franc., i. 356, 392, 393; ii. 321, 330.

  Bertie, Henry, ii. 9.
    James, i. 98; ii. 31.
    Vere, i. 50, 153; ii. 9.

  Berwick, ii. 97, 246, 328.

  Besilsleigh, Berks., ii. 84, 85, 92, 155.

  Betenham, Jer., i. 67.

  Betridge, Col., i. 108.

  Bigge, Thos., i. 253; ii. 274, 275.

  Billingsley, Sir Henry, i. 16, 99-103, 126, 212; ii. 15, 81, 111.
    Sir Henry (son), i. 102.
    Henry (grandson), i. 102.
    Martin, i. 103.
    Rich. (Rob.), i. 101, 103.
    Sir Thos., i. 67, 100, 102, 103.
    Sir ..., i. 100.

  Bilson, bp. Thos., ii. 23.

  Binnion, Rev. ..., i. 387.

  Birch, John, ii. 254.
    Peter, ii. 279, 280.

  Birford, ..., ii. 202.

  Birkenhead, Sir John, i. 104-106, 290, 360-362; ii. 157, 173.

  Birkhead, Henry, i. 106, 361, 362; ii. 26.

  Bishe, _see_ Bysshe.

  Bishop, Col., ii. 169.

  Bishops Canning, Wilts., i. 251, 252; ii. 184.

  Blackburne, Rich., i. 15, 18-20, 107, 333, 359-367, 372, 386, 393,
        395; ii. 113.

  Blagrave, John, i. 107.

  Blake, Rob., i. 107.

  Blandford St. Mary's, Dors., i. 36; ii. 179, 235, 330.

  Blencowe, Mr., ii. 282.

  Bletchingdon, Oxon., i. 403.

  Blount, Sir Chas., i. 248.
    Dr. Chas., i. 109, 356 (?).
    Sir Chr., ii. 251.
    Sir Henry, i. 108-111, 356; ii. 207.
    Sir Thos. Pope, i. 111.

  Blundeville, Thos., i. 15, 77.

  Blunt, _see_ Blount.

  Boleyn, Anne, i. 193.

  Bolton, Rob., i. 85.

  Bond, Henry, i. 15.
    John, i. 311.
    Thos., ii. 240.

  Bonham, Thos., i. 108, 111, 424.

  Bonner, Edm., i. 111.

  Booker, John, i. 112, 318.

  Boothby, Mr., ii. 107.

  Boston, Mr., i. 311.

  Boswell, Sir Will., i. 73, 211, 212; ii. 130.

  Bourman, Thos., ii. 2.
    Sir ..., ii. 245.

  Bourne, Mr., i. 417, 424.

  Bovey, Jas., i. 112-115, 141, 305; ii. 271.

  Bowman, Franc., i. 371; ii. 197.
    Mr., i. 110.

  Boyle, Lewis, i. 120.
    Robert, i. 118, 120, 372, 411, 412; ii. 182.

  Bradon forest, Wilts., i. 343; ii. 135.

  Bradshaw, Sarah, ii. 61.
    Mr., ii. 229.

  Bradstock (Bradenstoke) abbey, Wilts., ii. 322.

  Bramhall, John, i. 363, 373.

  Brampton (Bramston), Sir Franc., ii. 78.

  Bramston, Sir Muddiford, i. 104.

  Branker, Thos., ii. 126.

  Brawne, Sir J., i. 239.

  Brecon (town), i. 54, 59:
    (shire), i. 46, 51, 59, 276, 313.

  Breda, i. 121; ii. 45, 76, 122, 124, 130, 131.

  Brent, Sir Nath., ii. 245.

  Brentford, Midd., ii. 99.

  Brereton, (Brereton), baron--
    -- Will., 3rd baron, i. 121; ii. 124, 125.
    -- Rob., 4th baron, ii. 124, 125.

  Brereton, Sir Will., i. 122.

  Brerewood, Edw., i. 122.

  Brett, Arth., i. 123.

  Bridges, Gabr., i. 204.

  Bridgewater, John Egerton, 1st earl of, i. 245.

  Bridgman, Sir Orl., ii. 208.

  Briggs, Henry, i. 16, 123-125, 261; ii. 98, 215, 292, 295.

  Bright, Henry, ii. 162.

  Brightman, Thos., i. 125.

  Bristol, Glouc., i. 36, 123, 128, 147, 185, 277, 314, 315, 403, 404;
        ii. 297-299, 331, 332.

  Bristol, (Digby) earl of--
    -- John, 1st earl, ii. 183.
    -- Geo., 2nd earl, i. 227.

  Broadway, Dors., ii. 323.

  Brocas, Rich., ii. 322.

  Broke, _see_ Brooke.

  Brokenborough, Wilts., i. 322-324, 391.

  Brome (Broome), Alex., i. 126, 356.
    Henry, i. 126, 156, 267; ii. 286.

  Bromley, Sir Thos., ii. 35.

  Bromham (Bronham), Wilts., ii. 244, 294.

  Brooke, (Greville) baron--
    -- Fulke, 1st baron, i. 67, 205, 275; ii. 250.
    -- Robert, 2nd baron, i. 188, 275.
    ---- Catherine (Russell), baroness, i. 275.
    -- Robert, 4th baron, ii. 134.

  Brooke (Broke, Brookes), Chr. (of Oxford), i. 126; ii. 106, 110, 114.
    Chr. (of Lond.), ii. 49, 50.
    Marg., i. 219.
    N., i. 221.
    Rob., i. 87.

  Broome, _see_ Brome.

  Broughton, Edw., i. 127, 128; ii. 331.
    Eliz., i. 127.

  Brouncker, (Brouncker), viscount--
    --Will., 1st visc., i. 129.
    ---- Winifred (Leigh), viscountess, i. 129.
    -- Will., 2nd visc., i. 128, 161, 269; ii. 146, 147, 312.

  Browne, Anth., i. 37, 316.
    Israel[1378], i. 49.
    Sir Thos., M.D., i. 37, 210, 211.
    Thos., ii. 218, 248.
    Will. (poet), i. 130, 312.
    Will. (Trin. Coll., Oxf.), i. 173, 174.
    Maj.-gen., ii. 74.
    Mr., i. 210.

  Brownrigg, bp. Ralph, ii. 285.

  Bruce of Kinloss, Edward, 1st baron, i. 157.
    Rob., 4th baron, ii. 305.

  Bruen, Mr., ii. 48.

  Bryanstone, Dors., ii. 202.

  Buckhurst, Charles Sackville[1379], lord, ii. 34.

  Buckingham, (Villiers), duke of--
    -- George, 1st duke, i. 77, 202, 205; ii. 14, 100, 209, 270.
    -- George, 2nd duke, i. 137, 189, 190, 207; ii. 270, 301.

  Buckingham, Mary Villiers, co. of, ii. 270.

  Buckinghamshire, i. 178.

  Budleigh, East, Devon, ii. 192.

  Bulbridge, Wilts., ii. 89.

  Bullen, Anne, i. 193.

  Bullialdus, Israel, ii. 59, 289, 290.

  Bullock, Edward, ii. 265.

  Buntingford, Herts., ii. 283, 290.

  Burched, H., ii. 124.

  Burges, Mr., i. 48.

  Burghill, Dr., ii. 78.

  Burghley, William Cecil, baron, i. 61, 158, 237; ii. 28.

  Burhill, Rob., ii. 194.

  Burlington, (Boyle), earl of--
    -- Rich., 1st earl, i. 116, 118, 175-177.

  Burnet, bp. Gilb., i. 166, 169; ii. 304.

  Burt, Will., ii. 265.

  Burton, Hen., ii. 174.
    Rob., i. 130.

  Bury St. Edmunds, Suff., ii. 311.

  Busby, Rich., i. 146, 217, 285, 410; ii. 127, 128, 197, 240, 257,
        292, 293.

  Bushell, Thos., i. 71, 72, 83, 130-135, 331.

  Bussey, Rev. ..., i. 184.

  Butler, Sam., ('Hudibras'), i. 135-138, 146, 175, 204, 342, 371, 381;
        ii. 210, 277.
    Will., i. 126, 138-144; ii. 98.

  Butts, John, i. 270.

  Bysshe (Bishe), Edw., i. 239, 355; ii. 89.


  Cadiz, i. 223.

  Cadnam, Mr., ii. 262.

  Caen, ii. 140.

  Caesar, Sir Julius, i. 75.
    Mr., ii. 173.

  Caliver, a, ii. 320.

  Calne, Wilts., ii. 202.

  Calvert, Cecil, Geo., Leon., i. 143, 144.

  Cambridge (University), i. 76, 90, 93, 137, 141, 142, 178, 269, 309;
        ii. 53, 59, 102, 124, 171, 240, 280, 284, 293, 332.
    (Town), i. 90, 91, 92, 103, 360.
    The play at, i. 180.
    Great St. Mary's, i. 30, 139, 140; ii. 302.

  Cambridge (colleges)--
    -- Caius, i. 94, 268, 295, 296; ii. 284, 313-315.
    -- Christ's, ii. 32, 63, 67, 68, 114, 293.
    -- Clare Hall, i. 138, 139, 142, 180; ii. 86.
    -- Emmanuel, i. 29; ii. 280.
    -- St. John's, i. 123, 174, 175; ii. 29, 284.
    -- King's, i. 139, 143; ii. 86, 106, 113, 204, 236, 275, 307.
    -- Magdalene, ii. 157.
    -- Pembroke Hall, i. 29, 403; ii. 3, 232, 234.
    -- Peterhouse, i. 88.
    -- Queens', i. 95, 200, 203, 247, 248.
    -- Sidney, i. 257; ii. 108, 283, 284, 288.
    -- Trinity, i. 76, 88, 89, 93, 107, 414; ii. 11, 17, 114, 122, 196,
        257, 301.

  Camden, Will., i. 42, 144-147, 267, 322, 392; ii. 11, 15, 42, 57, 206,
        232, 325.

  Camden (Came Down), Dors., ii. 323.

  Canons Ashby, Northts., i. 240.

  Canterbury, i. 206, 296; ii. 84, 217, 266.

  Canterbury, abp. of, ii. 124.

  Canynges, Will., i. 147.

  Caporavio, ..., ii. 328.

  Carberry, (Vaughan), earl of, ii. 95, 292.

  Cardiff, Glam., i. 315; ii. 55, 171.

  Cardiganshire, i. 131.

  Carew, Thos., i. 34.

  Carey, Sir Edm., i. 193.

  Carisbrooke Castle, I. of W., i. 197, 207.

  Carlisle, Anne Howard, co. of Charles, 1st earl, ii. 325.

  Carlton, Sir Dudley, i. 279.

  Carnarvon, (Dormer), earl of, i. 130, 312.

  Carnwarth, Rob. Dalzell, 2nd earl of, i. 191.

  Carteret, Phil., i. 290.
    ..., ii. 174.

  Cartwright, Will., i. 148.

  Casaubon, Isaac, i. 96.

  Caspars, J. B., i. 354.

  Castlehaven, Mervyn Touchet, 2nd earl, i. 71, 121.

  Castlemaine, (Palmer), earl of--
    -- Roger, 1st earl, ii. 176.
    ---- Barbara (Villiers), co. of, i. 128.

  Catafalque, ii. 10, 77, 321.

  Cavendish, Sir Chas., i. 153, 366, 370, 386.
    Col. Chas., i. 154-157.
    Tho., ii. 192.

  Cavendish of Hardwick, Will., 1st baron, i. 396.

  Chalk, Broad Chalk, Wilts., i. 40, 44, 316; ii. 76, 113, 275, 307,
        333.

  Chaloner, Jas., i. 160.
    Rich., ii. 275.
    Sir Thos., i. 69.
    Thos. (father), i. 159, 160.
    Thos. (son), i. 159; ii. 55.

  Chamberlayne, Edw., ii. 324.
    Hugh, ii. 60.

  Champernowne, Kath., i. 262; ii. 178.

  Chandos, baron, i. 423.

  Chantrel, Mr., ii. 102.

  Chapell, Mr., ii. 63.

  Charles I, Prince Charles, i. 104, 108, 118, 148, 151, 156, 159, 171,
        196, 206, 218, 288, 289, 297, 333; ii. 2, 13, 44, 52, 56, 93,
        150, 186, 208, 267, 280, 318 (?).

  Charles II, Charles Prince of Wales, i. 86, 87, 124, 207, 218, 219,
        239, 283, 297, 335, 338-343, 354, 368, 371, 381, 385, 394, 395,
        397, 402, 403, 405; ii. 8, 28, 45, 58, 74-78, 80-83, 103-105,
        111, 119, 123, 127, 133, 134, 138, 143, 176, 195, 202, 232, 237,
        238, 241, 252, 255, 276, 277, 286, 287, 318, 330.

  Charleton, Francis, ii. 11.
    Walt., i. 67, 161, 371; ii. 300.

  Charlton, Wilts., i. 323, 391.

  Charnock, Tho., i. 162-170.

  Chaucer, Geoffrey, i. 96, 170, 189, 193, 219; ii. 318, 319.

  Chelsea, Middl., i. 70, 75, 131, 196, 271, 284, 307, 313; ii. 82, 84,
        330.

  Cheshire, i. 267, 293, 427; ii. 307, 326.

  Chester (city), i. 131.

  Chester, Chas., ii. 184.

  Cheynell, Fran., i. 172, 174.

  Chichester, Sussex, i. 172.

  Chichley, Sir Tho., ii. 79.

  Chigwell, Essex, ii. 132.

  Child, Tho., ii. 179.

  Chillingworth, Will., i. 151, 171, 370.

  Chippenham, Wilts., i. 242; ii. 181.

  Chivers, Secole, ii. 326.

  Christ Church, Hants., ii. 97, 288.

  Clarendon, (Hyde) earl of--
    -- Edward, 1st earl, i. 136, 373, 426; ii. 4, 6, 291.
    -- Henry, 2nd earl, i. 12, 426, 427; ii. 291.

  Clarendon park, Wilts., ii. 247.

  Clarges, Anne, ii. 73, 76, 77.
    Tho., ii. 73, 76.

  Clark, Ben., ii. 133, 136, 138.
    Deborah, ii. 61, 68.
    Sir Francis, ii. 93.
    Geo., ii. 173.
    John, i. 255.

  Clavell, John, i. 174.

  Clavius, Chr., i. 94, 333.

  Cleonardus, Nic., i. 144.

  Cleveland, John, i. 174.

  Clifford of Lanesborough, Chas. Boyle, 3rd baron, ii. 13.

  Clifford Castle, Heref., ii. 172.

  Clinton, Edw. Fiennes, baron, i. 235.

  Clinton, Gervase, i. 396.

  Clun, ..., ii. 14.

  Cluverus, Joh., i. 338.
    Mr., ii. 126.

  Coaches, i. 60, 340, 347; ii. 249, 267, 323.

  Cobham, Henry Brooke, baron, ii. 187.

  Cockaine, Mr., i. 71.

  Codrington, Jane, i. 34.

  Coke, Sir Edw., i. 56, 57, 70, 178, 197, 290; ii. 150, 194, 246, 318.
    Frances, i. 197.
    Roger, i. 178, 290.

  Colbert, J. B., i. 180; ii. 59.

  Coldwell, bp. John, i. 202.

  Cole, Dr., i. 137.
    Mr., ii. 312.

  Colepeper, John, 1st baron, i. 218.
    Thos., 2nd baron, ii. 262.

  Colepeper (Culpeper), Nich., i. 318.

  Colet, John, i. 181.

  Coley, Henry, i. 48, 49, 52, 181, 393, 425; ii. 105, 118, 260.

  Collins, John, i. 153, 159, 182; ii. 111, 293, 312, 315, 316, 332.
    Mark, ii. 207.
    Sam., i. 8; ii. 284, 307.
    Mr., ii. 195.

  Colyton, Devon, ii. 192.

  Combe, John, ii. 226.

  Compostella, i. 147.

  Conant, John, i. 210.

  Confucius, i. 115.

  Conquest, Sir Edm., ii. 93.

  Constable, Sir John, i. 77.

  Constantinople, i. 90, 91, 108.

  Conyers, Mr., ii. 191.

  Conyoke, Mr., ii. 50.

  Cooke, Anne, i. 76.
    Arnold, i. 309.
    Sir Rob., i. 309.

  Cooper (Cowper), Alex., i. 222.
    Sam., i. 136, 150, 182, 222, 338, 340, 354, 368, 394, 410; ii. 115,
        145.
    Bp. Tho., i. 36, 120, 183.

  Coote, Dr., i. 309.

  Copernicus, Nic., i. 238, 419; ii. 59.

  Corbet, Edw., ii. 244.
    Bp. Rich., i. 183-188, 270, 286; ii. 310.
    Vinc. (sen.), i. 183, 184.
    Vinc. (jun.), i. 187.

  Cork, ii. 133.

  Cork, (Boyle), earl of--
    -- Rich., 1st earl, i. 8, 115-120.
    ---- Cath. (Fenton), co. of, i. 116, 117.
    -- Rich., 2nd earl, i. 116, 118, 175, 176, 177.
    ---- Eliz. (Clifford), co. of, i. 175, 177.

  Cornbury, Oxon., i. 194.

  Cornwall, ii. 95, 329.

  Cornwalleys, Sir Franc., ii. 225.
    Mr., i. 228, 231.

  Coryat, Tho., i. 188; ii. 51-53.

  Cosens, bp. John, i. 353, 398; ii. 287.

  Cosh, major, i. 185; ii. 78, 93, 185.

  Cosham, Wilts., i. 193.

  Cossinet, Fran., ii. 237.

  Cothorne, Mr., ii. 128.

  Cottington, Fran., baron, ii. 145.

  Cotton, Chas., ii. 38.
    Sir John, ii. 219, 225.
    Sir Rob., i. 74, 212; ii. 219, 224.
    Sir Tho., ii. 224.

  Coventry, Sir Tho., ii. 29.

  Coventry, Warw., i. 150, 256, 406.

  Cowbridge, Glam., ii. 5-7.

  Cowley, Abr., i. 76, 189, 219, 226, 368, 377.
    ..., i. 193.

  Cowper, _see_ Cooper.

  Cox, lady, ii. 251.

  Cradock, Franc., i. 290.
    Zach., ii. 278.
    ..., i. 191.

  Crane, John, i. 139.

  Cranfield, Arthur, ii. 50.

  Cressy, Hugh, i. 150, 427.

  Cribbage, ii. 245.

  Croft, bp. Herb., i. 39.
    Sir ..., ii. 258.

  Cromwell, Oliver, i. 90, 132, 155, 156, 196, 268, 290, 328, 335; ii.
        10, 32, 37, 45, 47, 53, 65, 70, 72, 74, 79, 123, 131, 274, 276,
        281, 301, 316, 322.
    Rich., ii. 46, 123, 301.

  Crooke, Andr., i. 359, 360, 364, 369.
    Will., i. 333-391; ii. 29.

  Croone, Will., i. 191, 290.

  Crowther, Jos., ii. 255.

  Croydon, Surrey, i. 200.

  Crump, Mr., ii. 94.

  Cruso, John, i. 58.

  Cuff, Henry, i. 179.

  Culpeper, _see_ Colepeper.

  Cumberland, (Clifford), earl of Cumberland, i. 175-177.
    -- George, 3rd earl, i. 175; ii. 315.
    -- Henry, 5th earl, i. 176.

  Curle, bp. Walt., i. 173.

  Curtin, Sir Will., i. 191.

  Curwyn, Mr., i. 280.

  Cusa, Nich. di, ii. 319.

  Cutler, Sir John, ii. 411, 412.


  Dale, Val., i. 56, 58.

  Dalen, ..., i. 221.

  Danby, (Henry Danvers), earl of, i. 192, 193, 195, 196, 258; ii. 31,
        247.

  Danby, Tho. Osborne, earl of, ii. 105.

  Daniel, Sam., i. 230.

  Dantesey, _see_ Dauntesey.

  Danvers, Anne, i. 196; ii. 31, 32.
    Sir Chas., i. 192, 194.
    Chas., i. 310.
    Eliz. (Nevill), i. 193.
    Eliz., _see_ Purbec.
    Grace (Hughes), i. 196.
    Henry, _see_ Danby.
    Mr. Henry, i. 196, 258.
    Jane, i. 310.
    Sir John (obiit 1594), i. 195; ii. 247.
    Sir John (regicide), i. 70, 75, 124, 131, 134, 178, 180, 195, 196,
        230, 244, 245, 258, 307, 308, 313; ii. 12, 30, 31, 32, 82.
    Mr. John, i. 195, 196, 248.
    Magdalen, i. 195, 307, 313; ii. 16.
    Rachel and Rich., i. 56; ii. 298.
    Sir Rob., i. 196.
    R., i. 194.
    Rob., _see_ Purbec.
    Tho., i. 309, 310.

  Danvers-Villiers, family, i. 196.

  Dartmouth, Geo. Legge, baron, i. 194.

  Dary, Mich., i. 198.

  Dauntsey, Wilts., i. 124, 192-194, 196, 310.

  Davenant, Chas., i. 137, 209.
    Edw., merchant, i. 198, 199, 200.
    Dr. Edw., i. 42, 183, 198-203, 257; ii. 86, 302.
    Jas., i. 203.
    John, vintner, i. 204.
    Bp. John, i. 198-204, 257; ii. 289.
    John, barrister, i. 52, 198, 203.
    Nich., i. 204.
    Rev. Rob., i. 204, 206; ii. 244.
    Sir Will., i. 171, 204-209, 216, 275, 360, 370; ii. 55, 82, 103,
        226, 233, 240-244.

  Davenport, John, i. 209.

  Davis (Davies, Davys), capt. John, i. 210.
    Sir (Dr.) John, i. 212.
    Dr. John (Welsh dict.), i. 324.
    John, of Kidwelly, i. 306, 352; ii. 228, 299, 322.
    Mr., i. 98.
    Mr., i. 308.

  Davison, Dr., i. 336.

  Davton, Tho., i. 168.

  Dawes, Jon., i. 91.

  Day, John, i. 100.

  Dayrell, Sir John, ii. 292, 295.
    Miss ..., i. 292, 295.

  Dean, Forest of, ii. 327.

  Decretz, Emanuel, ii. 10, 55, 167.

  Dee, Arthur, i. 210-212.
    John, i. 16, 33, 59, 61, 65, 100, 210, 215, 237, 238, 262.
    Rowl. (sen.), i. 211.
    Rowl. (jun.), i. 210.

  Deekes, Jon., i. 387.

  Deere, Tho., i. 215; ii. 144.

  Deering, Sir ..., ii. 153.

  Delamaine, ..., ii. 111.

  Delaune, Gideon, i. 216.

  Delawarr, Chas. West, 5th baron, ii. 272.

  Dell, Mary, i. 385.

  Denham, Eleanor, i. 217.
    Sir John, judge, i. 216, 217, 219; ii. 18.
    Sir John, poet, i. 190, 206-208, 216-221, 263; ii. 18, 217, 233,
        306.
    Margaret, i. 219.

  Deodati, Carlo, ii. 63.

  Deptford, Kent, ii. 295.

  Derby, (Stanley), earl of--
    -- Edw., 3rd earl, i. 233.
    -- Will., 6th earl, i. 229.

  Derby, Mr., ii. 311.

  Des Cartes, René, i. 201, 221, 261, 366, 367, 411.

  de Valke, _see_ Valke.

  Devonshire, i. 262, 306, 354; ii. 72, 182.

  Devonshire, (Cavendish), earl of--
    -- Will, 1st earl, i. 331, 396.
    -- Will., 2nd earl, i. 154, 156, 330, 331, 347, 386, 393, 396.
    ---- Christian (Bruce), co. of, i. 154, 156, 157, 396, 397.
    -- Will., 3rd earl, i. 154, 341, 346, 351, 354, 355, 357, 364, 383,
        385, 386, 395, 396, 397.

  Dewes, Sir Symond, ii. 311.

  Digby, Sir Everard, i. 213, 223, 224.
    Geo., i. 231.
    Sir John, i. 224, 225; ii. 241, 244.
    Mr. John, i. 223, 228, 229, 231.
    Sir Ken., i. 28, 37, 131, 190, 224-233, 367; ii. 34, 113.
    Mr. Kenelm, i. 227, 231.
    Venetia (Stanley), i. 127, 226, 229-233.

  Digby of Geashill, Robert, 1st baron, i. 118.

  Digges, Dudley, i. 233, 236.
    Leon., i. 16, 233-239.
    Tho., i. 16, 233, 235, 236-239.

  Dighton, Mr., i. 422.

  Dinton, Wilts, i. 427.

  Dobson, Gerard, ii. 274, 278, 280.
    Judith, ii. 318.
    Will., i. 38, 51, 78; ii. 318.
    ..., i. 78.

  Dockwra (Dockery), Will., ii. 91, 324.

  Dod, John, ii. 300.

  Dodington, Sir Fran., ii. 37.

  Dodson, Rev. ..., i. 101.

  Dolman, Sir Tho., i. 293.

  Domville, Silas, ii. 256.

  Donne, John, i. 59, 68, 307, 308, 313, 418; ii. 14, 50.

  Donnington Castle, Berks., i. 170.

  Dorchester, Henry Pierrepoint, marq. of, i. 138; ii. 207.

  Dore Abbey, Heref., i. 423.

  Dorset, (Sackville), earl of--
    -- Tho., 1st earl, i. 229; ii. 209, 210.
    -- Rob., 2nd earl, i. 229; ii. 209.
    -- Rich., 3rd earl, i. 67, 100, 115, 127, 175, 177, 226, 229, 230,
        231; ii. 209, 246.
    ---- Anne (Clifford), co. of, i. 175, 177, 239.
    -- Edw., 4th earl, i. 171; ii. 115, 210.
    -- Rich., 5th earl, i. 104; ii. 209.
    ---- Frances (Cranfield), ii. 210.
    -- Chas., 6th earl, i. 21; ii. 210.
    _See_ Buckhurst.

  Dorsetshire, i. 84, 262.

  Douay, i. 171.

  Douch, John, ii. 24, 27.

  Dover, countess of, ii. 31.

  Downton, Wilts., ii. 178, 184.

  Drake, Arth., i. 194.
    Sir Franc., ii. 189, 192.

  Draper, John, ii. 100.

  Draycot, Draycot Cerne, Wilts., i. 176, 388; ii. 184.

  Drayton, Mich., i. 239; ii. 30.

  Drew, John, i. 251, 252.

  Droitwich, Worc., i. 230, 232, 285.

  Drury, Will., i. 58.

  Dryden, Erasmus, i. 240; ii. 232.
    John, i. 25, 97, 209, 240, 241, 257, 372; ii. 55, 67, 72, 232, 279.

  Dublin, i. 149, 216; ii. 68, 101-103, 138, 143, 147, 154, 264.

  Ducket, Will., ii. 327.

  Dudley, Henry, i. 28.

  Dugdale, Sir John, i. 209, 241.
    Sir Will., i. 33, 51, 133, 146, 181, 233, 241, 267, 275, 312, 317,
        355, 418; ii. 89, 219, 226, 232, 237.

  Duke, Dr., i. 135.
    Mr., ii. 192.

  Dumoulin, Louis, ii. 29, 206.
    Peter, ii. 69.

  Dun, Sir Daniel, i. 53, 56, 65.

  Duncomb, Sir John, i. 263.
    Dr., i. 149.
    Mr., ii. 110.

  Dungannon, Anne Trevor, visc., ii. 154.

  Dunkirk, i. 287; ii. 87, 256.

  Dunmore, John, i. 92.

  Dunning, Mr., i. 190.

  Dunstable, Sir John, i. 242.
    Mr., i. 178, 180.

  Dunstan, Saint, i. 242.

  Duport, Dr., i. 89.

  Duppa, Brian, i. 281.

  Durham, ii. 261.

  Dutch, the, _see_ Holland.


  Earles, bp. John, i. 95, 96, 145, 151, 152; ii. 28, 76, 214.

  Easton Piers, Wilts., i. 35, 36, 40, 44, 49, 51.

  Eastwell, Kent, i. 419.

  Eastwood, John, i. 33.

  Edgar, king, ii. 255.

  Edgehill, Warw., i. 108, 148, 297.

  Edinburgh, i. 422; ii. 99.

  Edmund, Saint, (Rich), i. 244.

  Edward the Confessor, i. 241.

  Edward I, i. 185.
    Edw. II, i. 260.
    Edw. III, ii. 56.
    Edw. VI, ii. 199.

  Egerton, Sir John and Sir Rich., i. 244.
    Sir Thos., _see_ Ellesmere.
    Maj-gen., ii. 22, 93.

  Egham, Surrey, i. 217, 219, 221; ii. 306.

  Eglionby, Geo., i. 151, 370.

  Elector, the Prince, _see_ Palatine.

  Elgin, Tho. Bruce, 1st earl, i. 312; ii. 35.

  Elizabeth, queen, i. 28, 54, 55, 58, 59, 61, 145, 193, 213, 214, 319,
        420; ii. 32, 180, 181, 183, 186, 214, 217, 267, 270.

  Elizabeth, daughter of James I, i. 295; ii. 14, 225.

  Ellesmere, Salop, i. 245.

  Ellesmere, Tho. Egerton, baron, i. 69, 122, 244; ii. 13, 52.

  Elowys, Sir John. ii. 178, 189, 195.

  Elsing, Henry, ii. 108.

  Elyot, Sir Tho., i. 69.

  Emerson, H., ii. 306.

  Enstone, Oxon., i. 131-135, 229, 233.

  Ent, Sir Geo., i. 245, 247, 248, 299, 301, 370, 379, 380, 382; ii.
        265.
    Mr. Geo., i. 245, 380; ii. 264.

  Erasmus, i. 154, 240, 241, 246-250; ii. 83-85, 319.

  Erigena, Joannes, i. 391.

  Esher, Surrey, ii. 309.

  Essex, ii. 4, 13, 63, 95, 123, 124, 131.

  Essex, Sir ..., ii. 43.

  Essex, (Devereux), earl of--
    -- Walt., 1st earl, ii. 250, 251.
    ---- Lettice (Knolles), co. of, ii. 251.
    -- Rob., 2nd earl, i. 69, 76, 179, 192, 222; ii. 251.
    -- Rob., 3rd earl, ii. 10, 321.

  Estcott, Rich., i. 220.

  Estcourt, Geo., i. 160.

  Estrées, César d', cardinal, and Jean d', admiral, i. 283.

  Etching, i. 407.

  Etherege, Geo., i. 15.

  Eton College, i. 120, 278-281, 418; ii. 105, 106, 113, 214-216, 236,
        274, 278, 307.

  Ettrick, Anth., i. 43, 47, 52, 116, 119, 203, 250; ii. 18, 89, 161,
        172.
    Will., i. 250.
    Mrs., i. 202.

  Evans, Rev. ..., i. 328, 393.

  Evelyn, John, i. 53, 250, 407, 408; ii. 109, 112.

  Everard, Mr., ii. 236.

  Exeter, ii. 193.

  Exeter, John Cecil, 4th earl of, i. 158.

  Ewyas Lacy, Heref., i. 423.

  Eynsham, Oxon., i. 233.

  Eyres, Sam., ii. 27.


  Fabricius, Germanus, ii. 69.

  Fairfax, Will., ii. 234.

  Fairfax of Cameron, Tho., 3rd baron, i. 250; ii. 70, 87, 207.

  Fairfax of Emley, Will., 3rd, and Tho., 4th, visc., i. 88.

  Fairstead, Essex, ii. 265.

  Falcanti, Giovanni, ii. 318.

  Faldo, J., ii. 137.
    Mrs., i. 212-214.

  Fale, Tho., i. 15.

  Falkland, (Cary), viscount--
    -- Henry, 1st visc., i. 149.
    -- Lucius, 2nd visc., i. 149-153, 172-174, 365; ii. 275, 287.
    ---- Lettice (Morison), viscountess, i. 149, 150.
    -- Henry, 3rd visc., i. 208; ii. 45.
    -- Anth., 4th visc., i. 149.

  Fanshawe (Fenshawe), John, ii. 27.
    Sir Rich., ii. 55.
    Mrs., ii. 24, 25.

  Farnaby, Tho., i. 29, 72, 106.

  Farnham Castle, Surr., i. 218.

  Farr, Mr., i. 110.

  Faucet, Mr., i. 67.

  Faulkner, Eliz., i. 231.
    Nich., i. 387.

  Fell, John. i. 2, 19, 343-346; ii. 309-311.
    Sam., i. 185; ii. 233.

  Felsted, Essex, i. 88, 116.

  Felton, John, i. 205.

  Fenshawe, _see_ Fanshawe.

  Fenton, Sir Geoff., i. 116, 117, 120.
    Sir Maur., ii. 142.

  Feriby, Geo., i. 251.

  Field, John, i. 92.
    Rich., ii. 38.

  Fielding, Rob., i. 197.

  Fiennes, Sir Edw., i. 235.

  Filmore, Sir Rob., i. 145.

  Finch, Sir Moyle, i. 419.

  Fisher, Sir Rich. (Tho.), ii. 261, 263.
    Will., ii. 98.
    ..., ii. 36.

  Fiske, Nich., i. 252.

  Fitzgerald family, i. 118.

  Fitz-hamond, Sir Rob., i. 315.

  Fitz-hardinge, Chas. Berkeley, visc., i. 98.

  Fitz-william, Will., 2nd baron, ii. 312.

  Flamsted, Edm., i. 261.
    John, i. 8, 285.

  Flatman, Tho., i. 252; ii. 152, 305.

  Fleetwood, Sir Gerard, ii. 30.
    Sir Will., i. 253.
    Sir Will., ii. 30.

  Flesher, J., i. 103.

  Fletcher, Giles, i. 213.
    John, i. 95, 96, 254; ii. 317.

  Florence, i. 319, 366; ii. 270.

  Florio, John, i. 254.

  Fludd, Tho., i. 145, 308; ii. 105, 196.

  Fobbing, Essex, ii. 123, 124, 127, 131.

  Folkestone, Kent, i. 295.

  Ford, Sir Edw., i. 255.
    Henry, i. 290.

  Foresthill (Fosthill), Oxon., ii. 61, 64, 65.

  Fortescue, Sir John, i. 229.

  Foster, Sam., i. 256.

  Foughelston (Fugglestone), Wilts., i. 309.

  Fountains Abbey, Yorks., i. 177.

  Fowler, John and Kath., ii. 152, 153.

  Foxe, John, i. 256, 268.
    Sam., i. 257.
    Mr., ii. 104.

  France, i. 54, 61, 63, 153, 181, 270, 283, 315, 399, 402; ii. 32, 59,
        72, 80, 81, 86, 133, 140, 180, 241, 242, 252, 302.
    Enslavement of Protestants in, i. 45, 270.
    Refuge of Royalists, i. 105, 206, 207, 334, 369, 370, 397, 398; ii.
        276.
    Sphere of educational travel, i. 39, 47, 90, 94, 112, 154, 159, 288,
        296, 396, 397, 398; ii. 7, 36, 44, 63, 132, 156, 240, 247, 304.
    French language, i. 113, 181, 254; ii. 68, 87, 122, 133, 140, 156,
        164, 170.
    Charles VIII, ii. 320.
    Francis I, i. 241, 249, 315.
    Henry III, ii. 217.
    Henry IV, i. 81.
    Louis XIII, ii. 81, 96.
    Louis XIV, i. 50, 106, 181, 207, 270, 353, 384; ii. 81, 120, 252.

  Freeman, Ralph, ii. 284, 285, 290.
    Mr., ii. 283.

  French, Peter and Robina, ii. 300.

  Fromantle, Mr., ii. 59.

  Fromundz, Jane, i. 215.

  Fulham, Midd., i. 74, 254; ii. 94, 119.

  Fuller, Nich., i. 31, 257.
    Tho, i. 29, 60, 100, 118, 126, 144, 158, 249, 257, 267; ii. 223,
        310.
    Mr., ii. 148.

  Furbisher, Simon, i. 258.


  Gadbury, John, i. 215, 241, 252, 258, 356, 392, 393; ii. 99, 104, 139,
        324.
    Will., i. 258.

  Gainsborough, Lincs., i. 155, 156.

  Gale, Peter, i. 47.
    Dr. Tho., i. 84, 94, 139, 140, 143, 190, 259, 282; ii. 95, 191.
    Will., i. 388.

  Galileo, i. 366.

  Gardiner, bp. Steph., i. 69.
    Mr., i. 45.

  Gargrave, lady, i. 196.

  Garnet, Anne, i. 310.

  Garnons, Mr., ii. 254.

  Garsington, Oxon., i. 29; ii. 22, 23, 25.

  Garth, Rol., i. 265.

  Gascoigne, Will., i. 260; ii. 79-81.

  Gassendi, Pierre, i. 366, 367, 398.

  Gastrell, Mr., ii. 260.

  Gataker, Chas. and Tho., i. 151.

  Gawen, ..., i. 316.

  Gay, Anne, i. 388, 389.

  Gayton, Edm., ii. 47.

  Gazaeus, Angelinus, i. 242.

  Gellibrand, Henry, i. 261, 366; ii. 295.

  Geneva, ii. 63.

  George, Hugh, i. 59.

  Gerard, Gerard, i. 246.
    Mr., i. 262.

  Gerard of Brandon, Chas., 1st baron, ii. 4, 28.

  Germany, i. 100, 113, 159; ii. 54, 133.
    Sphere of educational travel, i. 90, 112, 159; ii. 240, 247.
    Language, High Dutch, i. 113, 375; ii. 69, 87, 122, 125, 170.
    Low Germany, _see_ Holland.
    Emperor, (?) Rodolph II, ii. 43.
      Ferdinand III, i. 407.
      Leopold I, i. 412.

  Gibbon (Gibbons), Chr., i. 196.
    John, i. 241, 242, 268; ii. 296.
    Mr., ii. 173.

  Gibson, Edw., i. 126.

  Gilbert, Adrian, i. 262, 311; ii. 178.
    Will., i. 73.

  Gill, Alex. (sen.), i. 171, 262-266.
    Alex. (jun.), i. 171, 174, 262-266.
    Thos., ii. 264.

  Gillingham, Dors., i. 200-203.

  Glanville, Jos., i. 266, 285.

  Glastonbury, Som., i. 243.

  Glendower, Owen, i. 267.

  Glisson, Fran., ii. 167.

  Gloucester (city), i. 147, 151, 315, 422; ii. 249, 252, 329:
    (shire), i. 278; ii. 319.

  Gloucester, Henry Stuart, duke of, i. 218.

  Glover, Rob., i. 267.

  Glyn, John, i. 137.

  Goclenius, ..., ii. 54, 174.

  Godbid, A., i. 182. W., i. 255.

  Goddard, Jon., i. 268.

  Godfrey, Sir Edm. Bury, i. 269, 320.
    Mr., i. 141.

  Godolphin, Sir Fran., ii. 27.
    Sidney, i. 98, 365, 371; ii. 275.

  Goldman, Mr., ii. 119.

  Gondomar, i. 244.

  Goodall, Stephen, i. 133, 135.

  Goodman, Gabriel, dean of Westminster, i. 60.

  Goodwyn, Tho., i. 269.
    Will., i. 185; ii. 214.

  Goodyear, Henry, ii. 51.
    Mr., i. 131, 134.

  Gore, Tho., i. 270; ii. 43, 260.

  Goresuch, Mr., i. 270.

  Gorges, Arthur, sen. and jun., i. 270, 271.
    Ferd., i. 192.

  Gorges of Dundalk, Edm., 1st baron, ii. 78.

  Gorhambury, Herts., i. 19, 71, 79, 81, 84, 331, 393, 394.

  Goring, George, baron, _see_ Norwich.

  Goring, gen. Geo., i. 118.

  Gotehurst, Bucks., i. 228, 232.

  Gower, John, i. 271.

  Grantham, Lincs., i. 155, 156.

  Graunt, Henry, i. 271.
    Maj. John, i. 271-274; ii. 141, 142, 150.
    John, ii. 86.

  Gravelines, i. 287.

  Greatorex, Ralph, i. 181, 276; ii. 111.

  Greaves, Edw., i. 274.
    John, ii. 284, 285.

  Greece, i. 94, 154.

  Greek language, i. 144, 150, 154, 325, 329, 349, 403, 406, 417; ii.
        11, 64, 68, 102, 122, 140, 164, 194, 214, 215, 224, 258, 297.

  Green, Anne, ii. 141, 148.

  Greenhill, J., ii. 12.

  Greenway, Mr., i. 58.

  Gregory, Sir Will., i. 274.
    ...,  i. 274.
    ..., ii. 95.

  Grenbergerus, ..., ii. 80.

  Grendon, Bucks., ii. 226.

  Grenville (Granville), John, ii. 76, 77 ('Rich.' in error).

  Gresham, Sir Tho., i. 274; ii. 121.

  Grew, Nehem., i. 40.

  Grey, lady Kath., i. 66.

  Grey of Wilton, Arthur, baron, ii. 180.

  Griffith (Griffyn), Peter, ii. 88.
    R., ii. 166.
    ..., ii. 71.

  Grimston, Sir Harb., i. 66, 76, 78, 393; ii. 10, 76.

  Grostest, bp. Rob., ii. 169, 223.

  Grosvenor, Sir Tho., i. 293.

  Grove, Will., i. 200.

  Gubbins, Herts., ii. 85.

  Guernsey (Garnsey), i. 290; ii. 174.

  Guiana, _see_ America.

  Guildford, Surrey, i. 24.

  Gunning, Peter, i. 276.

  Guns, ii. 320.

  Gunter, Edm., i. 276; ii. 215, 295.
    Capt., i. 196.

  Guy, John, i. 277.

  Gwynn, Matt., i. 32, 212.
    Phil., i. 104; ii. 90.
    ..., i. 277.


  H., Sir J. (quaere Sir John Hoskyns), i. 270; ii. 142, 225.

  Haak, Theod., i. 26, 375; ii. 54, 69, 128-131, 324.

  Habington, Will., i. 277.

  Hacket, bp. John, i. 146.

  Haggar, Mr., i. 286.

  Haines, _see_ Hayne.

  Hake, Mr., i. 212.

  Hale, Sir Matt., i. 278, 394; ii. 203, 204, 221, 225.

  Hales, Sir Jas., i. 96.
    John, i. 278-281.

  Hall, bp. Jos., i. 159, 281; ii. 115, 150.
    ..., (S.J.), i. 227; ii. 34.

  Hallely, Mr., i. 363, 366, 381, 382, 384.

  Halley, Edm., i. 8, 282.

  Hamey, Baldwin, i. 284.

  Hammond, Henry, i. 19.

  Hampden, Ann, ii. 274, 280.
    Edm., ii. 279, 280.

  Hampshire, ii. 95.

  Hampton Court, Midd., ii. 28, 309.

  Hancock, John, ii. 27.

  Harcourt, Will., i. 225, 284.

  Harding, Eleanor, i. 322, 384, 385, 388.
    ..., ii. 330.

  Hardwick, Derb., i. 383.

  Hardwick, Will., 1st baron Cavendish of, i. 396.

  Harington, _see_ Harrington.

  Hariot (Harriot, Herriot), Tho., i. 16, 176, 187, 284-287; ii. 16, 95,
        188, 192, 257, 291, 292.

  Harley, Sir Edw., i. 53, 287; ii. 256.
    Sir Rob., sen., i. 287, 419; ii. 182.
    Sir Rob., jun., i. 157, 288.

  Harper, Tho., ii. 37, 112, 295.

  Harrington (Harington), Jas., i. 288-295, 366, 376; ii. 54; 148, 185,
        189, 193, 267.
    John, baron, i. 288, 295.
    Sir Sapcote, i. 288, 294.

  Harriot, _see_ Hariot.

  Harris, Rob., ii. 23.

  Harrison, Will., ii. 228.

  Harsnet, Sam., ii. 211.

  Hart, Mr., i. 292.

  Hartlib, Sam., i. 295; ii. 71, 129, 149.

  Harvey, Eliab, i. 295-299, 302.
    Dr. Will., i. 72, 295-305, 337, 365, 368; ii. 16, 167, 291.

  Harwich, Essex, ii. 254-256.

  Hastings, Mr., ii. 127.

  Hatton, Chas., i. 389, 391.
    Chr., 1st baron, i. 389; ii. 198.
    Sir Tho., ii. 284.
    Sir ..., i. 179.

  Hault Hucknall, Notts., i. 383.

  Hausted, Peter, ii. 198.

  Hawes, Will., i. 52, 149, 173; ii. 285, 290, 303.

  Hawking (falconry), i. 51, 331; ii. 37, 267, 298, 317.

  Hawles, John, i. 305.

  Hay, Breckn., ii. 293.

  Hayes, Devon, ii. 192.

  Hayes, Surrey, ii. 264.

  Haynes (Haines), Mr., i. 53; ii. 309.

  Hayward, John, i. 57.
    Mr., ii. 220.

  Haywood, Will., ii. 298.

  Head, Rich., i. 305.

  Heath, Jas., i. 306.
    Sir ..., i. 306.

  Hebrew, i. 420; ii. 68, 120, 122, 164, 194, 224, 258.

  Hele, Elize, i. 306.

  Hempstead, Essex, i. 296.

  Hen, Henry, ii. 149.

  Henchman, Humph., ii. 86, 267.

  Henderson, ..., i. 156.

  Henley, Sir Rob., i. 293, 306; ii. 187.

  Henrietta Maria, consort of Chas. I; the Queen Mother, i. 133, 134,
        190, 207, 216, 218, 225, 270; ii. 8, 176, 302.

  Henry VIII, i. 193, 315; ii. 248, 309.

  Henry, Prince of Wales, i. 159, 194, 254; ii. 50, 52, 80, 190, 314,
        315.

  Henshaw, Tho., i. 320, 321, 354, 418; ii. 13, 108, 110, 270.

  Herbert, bp. of Norwich, i. 187, 188.

  Herbert, Edw., i. 315.
    Geo., i. 68, 76, 194-196, 307, 309, 313.
    Jane, i. 310.
    Magdalen, i. 195, 307, 313.
    Rich., i. 313.
    Sir Tho., i. 289; ii. 228.
    _See also_ Pembroke, earl of.

  Herbert of Chirbury, Edward, baron, i. 68, 196, 307, 313, 370.

  Herbert, Will., lord (afterwards 6th earl of Pembroke), i. 48, 218.

  Herbert family, i. 313, 314.

  Hereford (city), i. 422; ii. 5, 254:
    (cathedral), i. 187, 419; ii. 254, 321:
    (shire), i. 39, 154, 267; ii. 256, 319, 329.

  Heringman, H., i. 221.

  Hertfordshire, ii. 95.

  Hertford, (Seymour), earl and marq. of--
    -- Edw., 1st earl, i. 57, 66.
    -- Will., 2nd earl, 1st marq., i. 57, 66; ii. 202.

  Hesketh, Mr., i. 38, 51.

  Hesse, landgrave of, ii. 62.

  Hevelius, Joannes, i. 283, 412; ii. 290.

  Heydon, John, i. 318.

  Heylyn, Peter, i. 275, 319; ii. 220.

  Highlands of Scotland, ii. 81.

  Hill, Abr., i. 101, 135; ii. 69, 206.
    Laur., i. 320.
    Nich., i. 319; ii. 15, 192, 270.
    Oliver, i. 120.
    Rich., ii. 11.
    Tho., i. 89.
    Rev. ..., ii. 313.

  Hillbrewers, Som., ii. 330.

  Hine, _see_ Hynd.

  Hobbes, Thomas, 'of Malmsbury,' i. 3, 16-21, 25, 44, 50, 70, 74, 75,
        83, 105, 151, 152, 154, 173, 207, 222, 289, 299, 301, 320,
        321-403; ii. 6, 7, 72, 113, 139, 140, 144, 153, 169, 214, 221,
        275, 277, 281, 289, 293, 320.

  Hobbes, pedigree of, i. 322, 388.
    Edmund, brother of Thomas, i. 322, 324, 325, 327, 329, 384, 385,
        388.
    Edmund, grand-nephew, i. 322, 325, 389.
    Francis, uncle, i. 322, 324, 388, 391.
    Francis, nephew, i. 322, 325, 337, 387, 388, 389.
    Thomas, father, i. 322, 323, 324, 327, 387, 388, 391.
    Thomas, grand-nephew, i. 322, 325, 337, 385, 389.

  Hobbes, Dr. Will., i. 261.
    Mr. Will., i. 387.

  Hodges, Mr., i. 110.

  Holbein, Hans, ii. 83-85.

  Holbitch, Mr., i. 87-89.

  Holder, Will., i. 31, 44, 378, 403-405, 409; ii. 214, 281, 285, 312.

  Hole, Mr., ii. 42.

  Holland, the Dutch, the Netherlands, the Low Countries, i. 63, 73,
        112, 113, 210, 235, 236, 288, 408; ii. 12, 73, 74, 78, 87, 132,
        147, 249, 271.
    The Dutch language, Low-Dutch, i. 113, 361; ii. 87, 122, 170.
    Lower Germany, i. 407; ii. 133.

  Holland, Hugh, i. 73, 406; ii. 49, 51.
    Philemon, i. 150, 248, 406.

  Holland, Henry Rich., 1st earl of, i. 227.

  Hollar, Wenceslaus, i. 301, 407.

  Holles, Denzill, i. 227.

  Holmby, Northts., i. 288.

  Holm-Lacy, Heref., i. 27.

  Holt, Mr., i. 213.

  Holybush, John, i. 408.

  Holyoke, Franc., i. 106.

  Holywood, John, i. 408.

  Hoode, Thos., i. 409.

  Hooke, Grace, i. 416.
    John, i. 409.
    Rob., i. 43, 120, 126, 130, 140, 164, 166, 371, 381, 409-416; ii.
        252, 261, 263, 281, 292, 302, 312-314.
    Mr., i. 395.

  Hooke, Hants., i. 409.

  Hooker, Rich., i. 69; ii. 115.

  Hooks and eyes, i. 205.

  Hopton, Arth., i. 16, 84, 242; ii. 223.
    Ralph, baron, ii. 100.

  Hopton family, i. 279.

  Horne, Mr., i. 342, 381.

  Horner family, i. 279.

  Horsey, capt., i. 115.

  Hortensius, Martinus, ii. 122, 130.

  Horton, Mr., ii. 113.

  Hoskins, John, painter, i. 409; ii. 115.
    John, of Trin. Coll., Oxon., ii. 24, 27.

  Hoskyns, Benedicta, i. 424.
    Sir Bennet, i. 416, 422, 423; ii. 12, 204, 223.
    Anne, wife of Sir Bennet, ii. 13.
    Chas., i. 416.
    Jane, i. 425.
    Rev. John, D.C.L., i. 416, 420, 424.
    John, serj.-at-law, i. 3, 319, 416-425; ii. 12, 48-50, 53, 188, 192,
        328.
    Sir John, i. 8, 43, 50, 220, 290, 294, 319, 320, 367, 418, 421, 425;
        ii. 32, 49, 225, 319.
    John, i. 425.
    _See_ Hoskins.

  Hoste, Mr., i. 112, 113.

  Hotham, ..., i. 155.
    ..., i. 160.

  Houghton-Conquest, Beds., i. 32; ii. 93, 316.

  Houghton Lodge, Beds., i. 312.

  Hounslow, Midd., i. 219; ii. 37.

  Howard, hon. Chas., &c., i. 425, 426.
    Sir Rob., i. 297.
    Hon. ..., i. 360.

  Howe, Josias, i. 186, 217; ii. 226, 253.
    Mr. ..., ii. 86, 88.
    Mr. ..., ii. 177.
    Mrs., ii. 23.

  Howel-Da, i. 211.

  Howell, Jas., i. 228, 348; ii. 203.

  Howland, lady, i. 302.

  Hucknall, Notts., i. 383.

  Hues, Rob., i. 15, 286, 287, 426; ii. 188.

  Hugo, magister, i. 244.

  Hull, Yorks., ii. 53.

  Humble, Mr., ii. 41.

  Hungary, ii. 247.

  Hungerford, lady, i. 48.

  Hunsdon, Rob. Carey, 6th baron, ii. 332.

  Hunt, Mr., i. 71.

  Hussey, Jas., i. 330, 393.

  Hyde, pedigree of, i. 427; ii. 323.
    Bp. Alex., i. 427; ii. 287.
    Sir Rob., i. 303, 427.

  Hynd (Hyne, Hine), Rich., i. 154, 387; ii. 294, 297.


  Idney, Mr., i. 71.

  Ilchester, Som., i. 417; ii. 308.

  Iles, Tho., ii. 303.

  India, i. 71, 157; ii. 90, 200, 235.

  Ingelbert, Mr., ii. 1, 60.

  Inglefield, lady, i. 284.

  Innocent, John, ii. 1.

  Innocent X, pope, i. 225, 226.

  Ipswich, Suff., ii. 308, 312.

  Ireland, i. 41, 47, 59, 88, 116-121, 149, 198, 199, 217, 256, 268,
        422; ii. 13, 91, 101-103, 132-135, 138, 141-149, 154, 180, 199,
        233.
    Irish language, ii. 268.
    Irish nursing, i. 120.
    Irish stitch, i. 79.

  Iron-acton, Glouc., ii. 172, 181.

  Ironside, bp. Gilb., ii. 170.

  Isaac, Rich., ii. 50.
    Mr., ii. 28.

  Isaacson, Henry, ii. 2.
    Rich., ii. 2, 3, 4.
    Will. and Randall, ii. 3.

  Isham, Sir Just., ii. 20.
    Mr., ii. 20.

  Islip, Adam, i. 93.

  Italy, i. 101, 153, 247, 254, 299, 312, 408, 421; ii. 35, 72, 203,
        275, 320.
    A sphere of educational travel, i. 39, 90, 94, 112, 120, 154, 159,
        288, 296, 300, 396, 397; ii. 63, 64, 156, 240, 247.
    _See also_ Rome.
    Italian language, i. 113, 193, 254; ii. 68, 122, 156.

  Ives, Sam., i. 135.

  Ivy-church, Wilts., ii. 247.


  Jackson, Mr., i. 346.

  Jacobs, Henry, i. 348; ii. 224.

  Jakeman, Dan., i. 289.

  Jamaica, ii. 341.

  James I, i. 8, 25, 30, 31, 56, 66, 70, 71, 82, 139, 146, 171, 178,
        180, 185, 202, 224, 251-254, 266, 421; ii. 4, 10, 13-15, 28, 41,
        52, 60, 186-188, 203, 321.

  James II, i. 86; ii. 149, 238.
    _See_ York.

  Jaquinto, ..., ii. 4.

  Jaspar, John, ii. 135.

  Jeffreys, John, ii. 122.

  Jenkins, David, i. 13; ii. 4-6.
    Sir Leoline, i. 44; ii. 5-9.

  Jermyn, Henry, baron, i. 189, 205.

  Jersey, ii. 174, 187.

  Jessamine, ii. 323.

  Jessop, John, i. 202.

  Jesuits, i. 94, 137, 221, 225, 229, 260, 367; ii. 34, 54, 79, 80, 140,
        143, 175, 189, 235, 261, 272.

  Jewkes (Jukes), Rowl., ii. 231, 235.

  Johnes, Tho., ii. 31.

  Johnson, Aubrey's spelling for Ben Jonson.
    _See_ Jonson, Ben.

  Johnson, Geo., ii. 9.
    Rich., ii. 221, 222, 225, 259.

  Jones, Henry, i. 58.
    Inigo, i. 161, 219, 296; ii. 10, 51.
    Tho., ii. 11, 88, 89.
    Tho., ii. 31.
    Tho., ii. 261.
    ..., i. 231.

  Jonson, Ben, i. 25, 68, 97, 128, 151, 179, 184, 205, 208, 214, 224,
        228, 231, 232, 245, 319, 321, 332, 356, 365, 370, 406, 418; ii.
        11-17, 28, 36, 49, 55, 100, 184, 192, 217, 220, 223, 226, 239,
        246, 275, 330.

  Joyner, Sir Andr., i. 61.

  Jukes, _see_ Jewkes.

  Juxon, bp. Will., ii. 287.


  Katherine, consort of Chas. II, i. 250, 343; ii. 43, 213, 227.

  Kaufman, Nich., ii. 58.

  Kelly, Edw., i. 210.

  Kem, Sam., ii. 269.

  Kent (county), ii. 95.

  Kent, Mi., ii. 88.
    Mr., ii. 260.

  Kent, (Holland), earl of, i. 406.

  Kent, (Grey), earl of--
    -- Henry, 8th earl, ii. 220, 224.
    ---- Eliz. (Talbot), co. of, i. 135, 137, 138; ii. 220, 221, 225.

  Kersey, John, ii. 17.

  Kettell, Ralph, i. 27, 95, 173, 174; ii. 17-27, 119, 162.

  Keulen, Ludolph van, ii. 27.

  Kidderminster, Worc., ii. 259.

  Kildare, (Fitzgerald), earl of, i. 118.

  Killigrew, Tho., i. 190.

  Kilmanton (Kilmington), Wilts., ii. 86, 161, 162, 168-170, 260.

  Kilmore, earl of, ii. 143.

  King, John, bp. of London, i. 74.

  Kingston-on-Thames, Surrey, i. 95, 243; ii. 2, 103.

  Kington St. Michael, Wilts., i. 27, 34, 35, 49, 50, 132, 154, 386,
        388, 389; ii. 183.

  Kitson, Rich., ii. 27.

  Knib, Mr., ii. 59.

  Knight, John, i. 386.
    Rich., i. 310.
    Mrs., i. 106.

  Knolles, Sir Franc., ii. 251.
    Rich., ii. 28.

  Knowyll (East Knoyle), Wilts., i. 403; ii. 311-313.

  Knox, Mr., ii. 322.


  Lacy, John, ii. 12, 14, 28, 101, 104.

  Laindon, Essex, ii. 123, 124, 127, 131.

  Lake, lady, ii. 283.

  Lambert, John, i. 11; ii. 74, 87, 152.

  Lamphire, John, ii. 235.

  Lamplugh, bp. Tho., i. 201.

  Lane, Edw., ii. 29.

  Langbaine, Gerard, i. 84.

  Latham, Simon, ii. 317.

  Latimer, (Nevill), baron, i. 193.

  Latimer, Rob., i. 35, 50, 299, 326-332, 393.

  Latin, i. 35, 36, 181, 276, 301, 329, 331, 396, 404, 417, 419; ii. 64,
        68, 81, 98, 102, 122, 140, 224, 227, 297, 323.
    The medium of State correspondence, i. 417; ii. 53, 65, 71.
    A spoken language, i. 113, 120; ii. 17, 123, 133, 194.
    Latin grammars,
      Brett's, i. 123;
      Erasmus', i. 249;
      Hartlib's, i. 295;
      Lilly's, ii. 119;
      Milton's, ii. 66;
      Oughtred's, ii. 110;
      Tong's, ii. 262, 263;
      Wolsey's, ii. 309.
    Latin dictionaries,
      Cooper's, i. 36, 120, 183;
      Goldman's, ii. 119;
      Milton's, ii. 66, 71.

  Latrone, Meriton, i. 305.

  Laud, Will., i. 104, 171, 174; ii. 18, 174, 220, 231, 280, 283.

  Lauderdale, John Maitland, duke of, ii. 81.

  Laurel, ii. 323.

  Laurence, Sir John, ii. 84.
    Philip, i. 323, 361.
    Will., ii. 197.

  Lavington, Wilts., i. 196, 258.

  Lawes, Henry, i. 352.

  Lee, pedigree of, ii. 31, 32.

  Lee, Geo., ii. 231.
    Sir Henry (obiit 1611), ii. 30-32.
    Sir Henry ('Whip and away'), ii. 30, 31.
    Sir Henry (obiit 1631), ii. 30, 31, 198.
    Sir Henry (obiit 1659), i. 196; ii. 31, 32.
    Sam., i. 182.
    Will., ii. 32.
    Capt. ..., i. 409; ii. 144.

  Leech, Abs., i. 98.
    Sir Edw., i. 43; ii. 36.

  Leeke, Mr., i. 101.

  Legge, Mr., i. 194.

  Leicester, ii. 310.

  Leicester, Robert Dudley, earl of, i. 27, 183, 236; ii. 251.

  Leicester, Robert Sydney, 2nd earl of, ii. 275, 280, 291.

  Leigh-de-la-Mere, Wilts., i. 35, 50, 329-332.

  Lely, Sir Peter, i. 410.

  Lenthall, Sir John, ii. 46, 84, 85, 87.
    Will., i. 149; ii. 78, 150.

  Leominster, Heref., ii. 150, 258.

  Lepanto, ii. 28.

  L'estrange, Sir Hamond, i. 170.
    Rog., i. 170, 293.

  Levant, the, i. 108.

  Lewis, David, i. 58.

  Le Wright, Mr., ii. 103.

  Leyden, i. 107, 120; ii. 27, 272.

  Lhwyd, Edw., i. 21.

  Lichfield, Staff., i. 275.

  Lichfield, Edw. Henry Lee, 1st earl of, ii. 30, 32.

  Lidyate, _see_ Lydiat.

  Liège, i. 197, 227, 404; ii. 34, 42, 236.

  Lilly, Will. (grammar), ii. 119, 309.
    Will. (astrologer), i. 33, 40, 182, 318; ii. 33.
    Mr., i. 410.

  Limerick, ii. 294.

  Linden, Mrs., ii. 73.

  Lingua franca, i. 113.

  Linus, Franc., ii. 34.

  Lisle, Rob. Sydney, visc., ii. 250.

  Lismore, i. 116, 120.

  Lister, Mart., ii. 35.
    Sir Matt., i. 312; ii. 35, 230.

  Littlebury, Mr., i. 32, 45.

  Littlecote, Wilts., ii. 159, 160.

  Littleton, Sir Tho., i. 180, 196.

  Llannelly, Breck., i. 59.

  Llantony, Monm., i. 416.

  Llantrithid, Glam., i. 39, 56, 315; ii. 7, 8, 268.

  Lloyd, David, i. 193, 307; ii. 113.
    Evans, ii. 35.
    Humph., ii. 266.
    Sir Marm., ii. 269.
    Meredith, i. 66, 211, 212, 243, 295, 307; ii. 166, 201, 202, 266.
    Bp. Will., ii. 257.

  Lluelyn, Geo., and Mart., ii. 36.

  Lock, Matt., ii. 254.

  Lodwick, Franc., i. 166; ii. 302.

  Loggan, David, i. 93, 283, 338, 354; ii. 145.

  Lollards, i. 178.

  London, _passim_.--In the Lives Aubrey cites by name about 140
    streets and quarters, over 50 churches, 20 'houses,' 20 inns or
    taverns, and about 25 shop-signs.

  Long, Barbara, i. 270.
    Dorothy, ii. 36, 185, 186.
    Henry, i. 193-195.
    Sir James, i. 43, 176, 270, 324, 388; ii. 36, 184.
    James, ii. 339.
    John, ii. 184.
    Sir Rob., i. 194; ii. 48.
    Sir Walt., i. 270, 312; ii. 36, 181, 184, 192.
    ..., i. 194.

  Long family, i. 316.

  Longomontanus, Christian Severin, i. 154, 370; ii. 125, 130.

  Lopez, Roger, i. 213.

  Louis XIV, _see_ France.

  Lovelace, Franc., Rich., Will., ii. 37, 38.

  Low Countries, the, Low Dutch, Low Germany, _see_ Holland.

  Lowder, Anth., ii. 135.

  Lowe, Sir Gabr., ii. 172.
    Tho., ii. 133.

  Lower, Rich., ii. 166.

  Lucar, Cyprian, ii. 38.
    Mark, ii. 41.

  Lucas, Anth., i. 404.

  Luce (Lucy), Jacob, i. 100, 102.

  Lucy, bp. Will., i. 373.
    Lady, ii. 251.

  Ludlow, Salop, i. 136, 270; ii. 9, 206.

  Lully, Raymond, i. 164, 166, 168, 211, 320.

  Lundy island, i. 131, 132.

  Lushington, Tho., i. 186-188.

  Lydall, John, i. 43, 52; ii. 21, 27.
    Rich., ii. 303.

  Lydiat, Tho., i. 15.

  Lyte, Deborah, i. 35, 49, 50.
    Edm., i. 154.
    Henry, ii. 41.
    Isaac, i. 35, 36, 49, 51, 133, 146, 252, 299; ii. 42, 179, 181, 308,
        317.
    Israel (a female Christian name), i. 49, 51; ii. 42.
    Tho., i. 387; ii. 41, 42.

  Macclesfield, Chas. Gerard, 1st earl of, ii. 28.

  Macock, John, ii. 74.

  Madock, John, i. 60.

  Mainwaring, bp. Rog., i. 334.

  Malay, i. 121.

  Malet, Mich., i. 75, 290; ii. 219.
    Sir Tho., i. 354; ii. 182, 186, 219, 225.

  Malmsbury, Wilts., i. 19, 20, 50, 323-329, 332, 342, 387-395; i. 37,
        181.

  Man, Isle of, i. 160; ii. 95.

  Manchester, Henry Montagu, 1st earl of, i. 74.

  Mandeville, Sir John, ii. 42.

  Mangerton, Kerry, ii. 142.

  Manners, ... (S.J.), ii. 34.

  Mansell, Anth., i. 56.
    Sir Fran., ii. 7.
    Dr. Fran., ii. 8.
    Sir Rob., ii. 203.
    ..., ii. 250.

  Many, Sir ..., ii. 38.

  Mapletoft, John, i. 94.

  Marlow, Chr., ii. 13.

  Mariet, Tho., i. 130, 151, 239, 280, 290; ii. 59, 75, 177, 195, 322.

  Markham, Gervase, i. 53; ii. 43.
    John, i. 312; ii. 43.
    Griffin, ii. 43.
    Col. ..., i. 155.

  Marlborough, Wilts, ii. 186, 243.

  Marlborough, William Ley, 4th earl of, i. 388.

  Marriet, _see_ Mariet.

  Marshall, Will., i. 239, 240, 295, 296; ii. 10, 43, 218.

  Martin family, ii. 47, 48.

  Martin (Martyn), Sir Henry, ii. 43, 44.
    Henry, i. 159, 208; ii. 6, 43, 44-47, 156, 157.
    John, ii. 176.
    Rich., i. 418; ii. 47-51.

  Martin Marprelate, ii. 48.

  Marvell, Andr., i. 91, 288, 293; ii. 53, 56, 72, 257, 304.

  Mary Tudor, queen, i. 254, 256, 316; ii. 200.

  Mary, queen of Scots, i. 56, 57, 65; ii. 186, 213.

  Mary, consort of Chas. I, _see_ Henrietta.

  Mason, Sir John, i. 53.
    Sir Rich., i. 104.

  Massey, Edw., i. 128, 151; ii. 75, 254.

  Massinger, Phil., ii. 54.

  Masters, Tho., i. 309.
    Mr. ..., ii. 216.

  Matthews, Augustin, ii. 113.
    Col., ii. 213.
    Mr., i. 124.

  Matthews' pill, i. 91.

  Maunsell, _see_ Mansel.

  Maurice, prince, i. 104.

  May, Tho., i. 209; ii. 55, 264.

  Mayerne, Sir Theod., i. 113; ii. 90.

  Maynard, Sir John, i. 137, 208, 306; ii. 203.

  Mayne, Jasper, i. 352, 370.

  Maypole, ii. 66, 77, 236.

  Mazarin, cardinal, i. 181; ii. 87.

  Meautys, Sir Tho., i. 71, 76.

  Mees, Nich., i. 134.

  Melanchthon, Phil., ii. 58.

  Mellifont, Garret Moore, baron, i. 217.

  Menis, Sir John, i. 206; ii. 38, 242, 245.

  Mercator, Dav., ii. 59.
    Nich., i. 94, 144; ii. 58, 109, 263.
    Gerard, ii. 315.

  Meriton Latrone, i. 305.

  Merret, Chr., ii. 59.

  Merry, Tho., ii. 59.

  Mersenne, Marin, i. 154, 366, 397, 398; ii. 293.

  Mershe, John, ii. 121.

  Merton abbey, Surrey, i. 97.

  Meyrick, Sir Will., ii. 8.

  Middlesex, ii. 95.

  Middlesex, Lionel Cranfield, earl of, i. 96, 406; ii. 49, 56, 57, 210.
    Anne (Brett), co. of, ii. 245.

  Middlesex, Chas. Sackville, earl of, ii. 210.

  Middleton, Sir Hugh, i. 255; ii. 1, 60.

  Milburne, Will., ii. 78, 79.

  Miles, Mr., i. 213.
    Mr., i. 289, 294.

  Millington, Sir Tho., ii. 227.

  Milton, John, i. 7, 213, 290; ii. 60-72, 152.

  Milton, Anne (sister of the poet), and Anne (daughter), ii. 61.
    Chr.(brother), ii. 61, 62, 63.
    Deborah(daughter), ii. 61, 64, 68.
    Elizabeth Minshull (wife), ii. 61, 65, 66, 72.
    John (?) (grandfather), ii. 61,
    John (father), ii. 61, 62, 66, 62.
    John (son), ii. 61.
    Katherine 67.
    Woodcock (wife), ii. 65.
    Mary Powell (wife), ii. 61, 64, 65.
    Mary (daughter), ii. 61, 68.
    Rich. (nephew), ii. 61.
    Sarah Bradshaw (mother), ii. 61, 66.
    Thomazine (sister-in-law), ii. 61.

  Minshull, Eliz., ii. 61, 65.

  Mompesson, Sir Giles, ii. 220, 225.

  Monk, Geo., i. 94, 291, 294; ii. 10, 72-78, 87, 289, 321.
    Nich., ii. 77.

  Monmouthshire, i. 51, 158, 314; ii. 329.

  Montagu, bp. Rich., ii. 220.
    Sir Will., i. 158.
    Lady (Mary Aubrey), i. 230, 300; ii. 152, 154.
    Mr., i. 32.

  'Montelion,' ii. 152.

  Montgomery castle, i. 307, 308, 313, 314.

  Montgomery, Phil. Herbert, 1st earl of, i. 175, 320.
    Susan (Vere), co. of, i. 320.
    Anne (Clifford), co. of, i. 175.

  Montjoy, Will. Blount, 4th, and Chas., 5th, baron, i. 248.

  Moore, Sir Garret, i. 217.
    Sir Jonas (sen.), i. 124, 260, 332, 369, 394; ii. 59, 78-81, 108,
        142, 314, 316.
    Sir Jonas (jun.), ii. 80.
    _See also_ More.

  Moorhampton, Heref., i. 419.

  Moray, Sir Rob., i. 208, 285; ii. 81, 202, 269.
    Lady, ii. 244, 245.
    Miss ..., i. 152.
    _See also_ Murray.

  Morden, W., i. 103, 107.
    Mr., ii. 238.

  Mordiford, Heref., ii. 328.

  More, Alex., ii. 69, 70.
    Henry, i. 141, 142.
    Sir Tho., i. 69; ii. 82-85, 89, 155.
    Mr., ii. 84.
    Mrs., ii. 44, 382.
    _See also_ Moore.

  Morehouse, Lanc., i. 20; ii. 86, 326.

  Morgan, Sir Tho., ii. 86-88.
    William, i. 294; ii. 88.
    ... (of Oxford), i. 54.
    Mr., i. 136.
    Mr., ii. 95.
    Mr., ii. 99, 102, 104.

  Morian, John, ii. 130.

  Morison, Sir Rich., i. 149.

  Morley, bp. Geo., ii. 15, 16.

  Morris, Mr., ii. 321.

  Morton, card., ii. 85, 89.

  Mouffet (Muffet), Tho., i. 311; ii. 89, 218.

  Moxon, Mr., i. 282.

  Mulcaster, Rich., i. 29, 31.

  Mummy, i. 133.

  Munday, Mr., ii. 90.

  Murray, Rob., ii. 90, 262, 324.
    _See also_ Moray.

  Mynne, Rich., i. 361.


  Nalson, John, ii. 207.

  Napier, John, of Merchiston, i. 125.
    Dr. Rich., i. 32, 33, 224, 229, 241, 262; ii. 43, 91, 92, 247.
    Sir Rich., ii. 92.

  Naseby, Northts., ii. 280.

  Nash, Mr., ii. 312.

  Nayler, ? John, i. 174, 175.

  Naylour, Will., i. 156.

  Nealand, Will., i. 91.

  Neale, Sir Will., ii. 93.
    Will., ii. 93.

  Needler, Mr., ii. 196.

  Neile, Sir Paul, i. 372; ii. 94, 254.
    Rich., ii. 93, 94.
    Will., ii. 94.

  Nevile, Eliz., i. 193.
    Henry, i. 109, 289-293; ii. 50.

  Newark-on-Trent, Notts., i. 156, 174.

  Newbury, Berks., i. 152; ii. 265.

  Newcastle-on-Tyne, ii. 328.

  Newcastle-on-Tyne, William Cavendish, earl, marq., duke of, i. 153,
        156, 206, 359, 366, 370, 386; ii. 13.
    Marg. (Lucas), duchess of, i. 105.

  Newcombe, Tho., i. 361.

  Newmarket, Cambr., i. 138, 139.

  Newmarsh, Sir Bern., i. 276.

  Newport, ..., ii. 69.

  Newport, I. of W., i. 287, 409.

  Newton, Isaac, i. 15, 414, 415.
    John, ii. 94.

  Newton-tony, Wilts., i. 203.

  Niceron, Jean-François, i. 367.

  Nicholas, Sir Edw., i. 151.

  Nicholson, James, i. 97.

  Nightingale, ..., i. 24.

  Nimeguen, ii. 8.

  Norborne, Henry, i. 107.

  Norden, John, ii. 94.

  Norfolk, ii. 79.

  Norfolk, Tho. Howard, 1st earl of, i. 408.
    _See_ Arundel.

  Norfolk, Henry Howard, 6th duke (obiit 1684), i. 228; ii. 112, 323.

  Norreys, lord, _see_ Abingdon.

  North, Sir Fran., ii. 96.
    Dudley, 3rd baron, ii. 95, 187.
    Rog., ii. 95, 187, 188.
    Tho., ii. 96.

  Northampton, Will. Parr, 1st earl of, i. 315, 317.

  Northampton, Henry Howard, 1st earl of, ii. 52.

  Northampton, (Compton), earl of--
    -- Will., 1st earl, ii. 328.
    -- Spencer, 2nd earl, i. 188.
    -- James, 3rd earl, i. 175.
    ---- Isabella (Sackville), co. of, i. 175.

  Northumberland, John Dudley, duke of, ii. 250.

  Northumberland, (Percy), earl of--
    -- Henry, 8th earl, i. 192.
    ---- Catherine (Nevile), co. of, i. 192.
    -- Henry, 9th earl, i. 285, 287; ii. 16, 188, 250, 292.
    ---- Penelope (Sydney), co. of, ii. 250.
    -- Algernon, 10th earl, i. 218; ii. 292.
    -- Joscelyne, 11th earl, ii. 263.

  Norton, Silas, ii. 136.
    Tho., i. 147, 168.
    Capt. ..., i. 135.
    ..., ii. 202.

  Norwich, i. 187, 188, 210.

  Norwich, Geo. Goring, earl of, i. 118, 121; ii. 124, 196.

  Norwood, Rich., i. 124; ii. 96, 315.

  Nottingham, Chas. Howard, earl of, ii. 184.

  Nottingham, Heneage Finch, earl of, ii. 144.

  Noy, Will., i. 139, 244; ii. 98.

  Nurse, Tho., ii. 257.


  Oates, ? Titus, i. 367.

  Ogilby, John, i. 41; ii. 28, 99-105.

  Oldenburgh, Mr., i. 363; ii. 313.

  Oldam, Rev. ..., i. 194.

  Oliver, John, i. 296, 411; ii. 10.
    Mr., ii. 171.

  Onslow, Mr., ii. 110.

  Opdam de Wassenaer, ii. 132.

  Orange, prince of--
    -- Frederick Henry, i. 121; ii. 122, 130, 131.
    -- Will. II, ii. 76.
    -- Will. III, ii. 148.

  Orleans, duke of, ii. 302.
    Duchess of, ii. 252.

  Ormond, Jas. Butler, duke of, ii. 132.

  Orrery, Roger Boyle, 1st earl of, i. 118.

  Orwincle (i.e. Aldwinkle), Northts., i. 257.

  Osburne, Fran., i. 370; ii. 174, 186, 327.

  Osney abbey, i. 38, 39, 51, 329; ii. 311.

  Ossory, Tho. Butler, earl of, ii. 155.

  Oughtred, Ben., ii. 106-113.
    Will., i. 42, 124, 127, 298; ii. 79, 105-114, 126, 236, 280, 282,
        284.

  Outram, Will., ii. 114, 263.

  Overall, John, ii. 61, 115.

  Overbury, Sir Giles, ii. 119.
    Sir Tho. (sen.), i. 96, 194; ii. 118, 182, 195.
    Sir Tho. (jun.), ii. 119, 195, 228.

  Owen, John, epigrammatist, i. 194, 417, 418, 425; ii. 309.
    John, divine, i. 85.
    Thankful, ii. 195.

  Oxenbridge, Dr. Dan., John, Kath., Mrs. ..., ii. 152, 153.

  Oxford (Colleges)--
    -- St. Alban Hall, i. 107.
    -- All Souls, i. 54, 104, 106, 236; ii. 2, 19, 92, 198.
    -- Balliol, ii. 24.
    -- Brasenose, i. 85, 122, 274, 426; ii. 141, 172.
    -- Broadgates Hall, i. 111; ii. 50.
    -- Christ Church, i. 85, 123, 130, 133, 135, 148, 151, 177, 184,
        185, 188, 269, 276, 286, 306, 343-345, 410, 426; ii. 11, 62, 89,
        132, 214, 233, 247, 273, 301, 303, 308-311.
    -- Corpus Christi, i. 26, 204; ii. 194, 294.
    -- St. Edmund Hall, ii. 5, 72, 94.
    -- Exeter, i. 122, 130, 159, 220; ii. 26, 92, 126, 234, 308.
    -- Gloucester Hall, i. 26-28, 225; ii. 37, 206, 296.
    -- Hart Hall, ii. 220, 235.
    -- Jesus College, i. 52, 307, 309; ii. 7, 8, 171, 201, 269.
    -- St. John's, i. 31, 204, 320; ii. 298, 302.
    -- Lincoln, i. 295; ii. 50, 113, 172, 173, 211.
    -- Magdalen College, i. 183, 251; ii. 28, 36, 280, 308, 309.
       Magd. Coll. School, i. 343.
    -- Magdalen Hall, i. 183, 268, 278, 287, 324, 328-330, 377, 391,
        393, 427; ii. 18, 32, 33, 258, 300.
    -- St. Mary Hall, i. 122, 426.
    -- Merton, i. 33, 123, 150, 151, 268, 278, 279, 301; ii. 36, 160,
        214, 216, 224, 244.
    -- New College, i. 252, 253, 309, 416, 419, 424, 425; ii. 235.
       New College School, i. 343.
    -- New Inn Hall, i. 364; ii. 256.
    -- Oriel, i. 104, 203, 287; ii. 35, 36, 173, 179.
    -- Pembroke, i. 112, 188; ii. 235.
    -- Queen's, i. 282, 305.
    -- Trinity, i. 1, 26-29, 38, 43, 46, 51, 52, 106, 108, 111, 143,
        149, 151, 171-174, 186, 217, 255, 261, 275, 280, 288, 300, 377;
        ii. 11, 12, 17-27, 50, 89, 141, 156-158, 161-165, 169-173, 177,
        216, 253, 265, 285, 296, 322.
    -- Univ., i. 244; ii. 7, 11, 44, 96.
    -- Wadham, i. 103, 107, 126, 174, 218, 266, 410; ii. 84, 92, 114,
        141, 155, 285, 300, 302, 304.

  Oxford (Buildings).
    -- Ashmolean, i. 21, (?) 106; ii. 316.
    -- Friar Bacon's Study, i. 184.
    -- Bodleian Library, i. 77, 125, 212, 225, 250; ii. 214, 216.
    -- Bodleian Picture Gallery, i. 249, 258, 368 ('the archives'); ii.
        148, 235, 253.
    -- Botanic Garden, i. 194.
    -- Castle, i. 51.
    -- Crown Inn, i. 204.
    -- St. Ebbe's Church, ii. 323.
    -- St. Mary Virgin Church, ii. 19, 25.
    -- St. Mary Magd. Church, ii. 311.
    -- Osney abbey, ii. 360.

  Oxford, (Vere), earl of--
    -- Edward, 17th earl, i. 192, 319, 322; ii. 184, 192, 270.
    -- Aubrey, 20th earl, i. 277.


  P--, E., ii. 273.

  Packer, Philip, i. 98, (?) 296 ('Parker'); ii. 71, 322, 328.

  Paget, Dr., ii. 72.
    Mr., ii. 60.

  Pakeman, Dan., ii. 207.

  Palatine of the Rhine, Palsgrave, Frederick V, ii. 14.
    Chas. Louis, i. 101, 104; ii. 224, 225, 300, 301.

  Palmer, Jas., ii. 157.

  Pamphlin, Chas., ii. 119.

  Parker, Geo., ii. 239.
    Sam., ii. 54.
    Sir Phil., ii. 255.
    Mr. (? Packer), i. 296.

  Parr, Catherine, i. 193, 315.
    Sir Tho., i. 315.

  Parsons, Rob., i. 27.

  Partridge, John, i. 283; ii. 119.

  Pascall, Andr., i. 61, 162-170, 247, 248, 256; ii. 302.

  Passaeus, Simon, ii. 49.

  Paulet, Amyas, ii. 308.
    Rich., ii. 326.

  Paynter, Jonathan, i. 110.

  Pearson, bp. John, i. 203, 353; ii. 212.

  Peele, James, ii. 120.

  Pell, Dr. John, i. 16, 86, 121, 124, 154, 181, 234, 247-249,
        284, 285, 293, 370, 394, 408; ii. 27, 54, 90, 121-131, 184,
        197, 249, 257, 272, 291-293, 309, 310, 319.
    Mr. John, ii. 127, 128.

  Pemble, Will., ii. 258.

  Pembridge castle, Heref., i. 59, 204.

  Pembroke, (Herbert), earl of--
    -- Will., 1st earl, i. 54, 60, 61, 310, 314-317.
    ---- Anne (Parr), co. of, i. 315, 317.
    -- Henry, 2nd earl, i. 310, 312, 315; ii. 90, 104.
    ---- Mary (Sydney), co. of, i. 243, 262, 310-313; ii. 35, 230, 247,
        250.
    -- Will., 3rd earl, i. 312, 313, 317, 418.
    -- Phil., 4th earl, i. 105, 175, 177, 218, 309, 312; ii. 55, 104.
    ---- Anne (Clifford), co. of, i. 175, 177.
    -- Phil., 5th earl, i. 216, 225; ii. 160.
    -- Will., 6th earl, i. 48, 49, 225; ii. 353.
    -- Phil., 7th earl, i. 317, 225; ii. 90.
    -- Tho., 8th earl, i. 45.

  Penkelly, Breckn., i. 313.

  Penn, Sir Will., ii. 131, 132, 133, 135.
    Will., i. 13, 45, 53; ii. 131-138.
    Pedigree, ii. 135.

  Penny post, ii. 91, 324.

  Penruddock, Geo., ii. 260, 261.
    Sir John, i. 290, 406.
    Sir Tho., ii. 138.

  Penry, John, ii. 48.

  Perry, Joan, ii. 228.

  Persia, i. 272; ii. 228.

  Peters, capt., i. 196.

  Petrarca, Francesco, i. 421.

  Petty, Eliz., lady, i. 116; ii. 139, 148.
    Geo., ii. 38.
    Max., i. 290.
    Sir Will., i. 9, 43, 50, 53, 272, 274, 336, 349, 365, 367, 368; ii.
        139-149, 273.

  Peyton, Rev. ..., i. 180; ii. 307.

  Phale, _see_ Fale.

  Philips, Andrew, ii. 150.
    Anne, ii. 61, 64.
    Edw. (father), ii. 61.
    Edw. (son), ii. 61, 63-71.
    Fabian, i. 320; ii. 1, 60, 98, 150, 160, 203, 219, 224, 225, 322,
        332.
    Hector, ii. 154.
    James, ii. 153.
    John, ii. 64, 152.
    Kath., i. 126; ii. 152-155.
    Sir Rob., ii. 50.
    Vere, i. 143.

  Philpot, John, i. 233.

  Piedmont, ii. 123, 131.

  Pierce, Tho., ii. 290.

  Pierson, _see_ Pearson.

  Pigott, Henry, ii. 155.
    Tho., i. 20, 166; ii. 84, 85, 155, 302.

  Pins, ii. 324.

  Pisa, i. 247.

  Pitcher, Mr., i. 263.

  Pitiscus, Barth., i. 96; ii. 111, 126.

  Pittis, Tho., ii. 155.

  Pitts, Moses, ii. 58, 66.

  Platers, Sir Will., ii. 156.

  Plattes, Rowl., ii. 145.

  Player, Mr., ii. 172.

  Playford, J., ii. 62.

  Pleydell, Jos., i. 267.

  Plot, Rob., i. 33, 134, 404.

  Poland, i. 150, 213, 214; ii. 247.

  Pond, Ben. (almanac), i. 51; ii. 1.
    Edw., ii. 1.
    Mr., ii. 155.

  Pope, lady Eliz., ii. 17, 22.
    Sir Tho., i. 111; ii. 22, 157, 161, 162.
    Walt., ii. 300.

  Popham family, ii. 160.

  Popham, Sir Fran., ii. 159.
    Sir John, ii. 158-160.
    Mr. John, ii. 159, 160.
    Admiral ..., i. 404.
    Col. ..., ii. 316.

  Pordage, Dr. John, ii. 161.
    Sam., 160.

  Porter, Endymion, i. 205.

  Portland, Dors., i. 161, 219.

  Portsea Castle, Hants., i. 292.

  Portsmouth, Hants., i. 85, 194; ii. 80.

  Portugal, i. 58.

  Post and pair, i. 329.

  Potluck, ..., i. 327, 388.

  Pott, Geo., i. 395.

  Potter, Franc., i. 43, 108, 143, 223, 224, 281, 304; ii. 19, 86,
        161-170, 260, 299, 328, 329.
    Hannibal, i. 111, 173, 174, 261; ii. 161, 162, 171, 285.
    Rich., ii. 161, 162.

  Potterne, Wilts., i. 202.

  Poulterey, John, ii. 263.

  Poultney (Pulteney), Sir Will., i. 290.

  Powell, Dav., i. 51.
    Mary, ii. 61, 64, 65.
    Erasmus, Rich., Vavasor, ii. 171.

  Power, Jas., i. 387.
    John, i. 27, 29.
    Zachary, i. 29.
    Rev. ..., i. 387.

  Powis, Will. Herbert, 1st baron, i. 277, 315.

  Powney, Mrs., i. 280, 281.

  Poynter, Tho., i. 32. Vincent, i. 184.

  Poyntz, John, ii. 173.
    Sir Rob., ii. 172, 181.
    Capt., ..., i. 45, 53.

  Prague, i. 210, 407.

  Price, Dan., i. 187.

  Prideaux, John, i. 343; ii. 234.
    Mr., ii. 192.

  Primige, Dr., i. 300.

  Printing, ii. 321, 324.

  Prisoner, a 'close,' i. 422.

  Prothero, Mr., ii. 291, 292.

  Prujean, Fran., i. 297.

  Prynne, Will., i. 261; ii. 173-175.

  Pufendorf, Sam., i. 376.

  Pugh, Rob., i. 60; ii. 34, 42, 175.

  Pullen, Josias, i. 183, 377.

  Pulteney, _see_ Poultney.

  Purbeck (Villiers), viscount--
    -- John, 1st visc., i. 196, 197.
    ---- Frances (Coke), viscountess, i. 197, 406.
    -- Robert[1380], 2nd (self-styled) visc., i. 196, 197.
    ---- Eliz. (Danvers), viscountess, i. 179, 192, 193, 194 (Eliz.
        Villiers), 196, 197, 222, 357; ii. 32, 84, 247.
    -- Rob., 3rd (self-styled) visc., i. 197.
    ---- Marg. (Burke), viscountess, i. 197.

  Purchas, Sam., i. 175, 285.

  Purfoote, Tho., ii. 120.

  Pye, Sir Rob., i. 422.


  Quakers, i. 84, 133, 134, 209; ii. 132, 133, 136, 137.

  Quarles, Fran., i. 240; ii. 153, 176.

  Queen Mother, _see_ Henrietta.

  Quintin, riding at the, ii. 330.


  Radford, Will., i. 280; ii. 21, 177, 265.

  Radnor, John Robartes, earl of, ii. 203.

  Raglan, Monm., ii. 328.

  Rainsford, Sir Henry, i. 151.

  Raleigh, Sir Walter, i. 69, 115, 116, 176, 179, 187, 192, 262, 285,
        287, 294, 311, 354, 418; ii. 15, 95, 96, 177-195, 233, 239, 323.

  Raleigh, Carew (brother of Sir Walter), ii. 178, 179, 184.
    Carew (son), ii. 178, 189, 193, 195.
    Geo. and Gilb. (nephews), ii. 178.
    Tho. (grandnephew), ii. 178, 179, 182, 191.
    Dr. Walt., ii. 178.
    Walt. (son), ii. 178, 194.
    Walt. (grandson), ii. 195.
    Walt. (grandnephew), ii. 178, 179, 182, 191.

  Ralphson, Mr., ii. 195.

  Ramsbury Abbey, Wilts., i. 315.

  Ramus, Peter, i. 8, 100, 224.

  Randolph, John, ii. 195, 196.
    Tho., i. 76; ii. 195-198.
    Will., ii. 196.

  Ranelagh, (Jones), viscount--
    -- Arthur, 2nd visc., i. 118.
    ---- Kath. (Boyle), viscountess, i. 118, 121; ii. 278.
    -- Rich., 3rd visc., 1st earl, i. 118.

  Ranew, Nath., i. 116.

  Ratcliffe, Sir Edw., ii. 51.
    Sir Geo., ii. 102.

  Raven, capt., ii. 127, 128.

  Rawley, Will., i. 67, 74, 394.

  Ray, John, ii. 302.

  Reade, Alex., i. 286.

  Reading, Berks., i. 61, 107; ii. 141.

  Record, Rob., ii. 198-201.

  Redi, ..., ii. 319.

  Reding, Sir R., ii. 262.

  Reynolds, Edm., i. 26, 27, 28.
    John (C. C. C.), i. 26.
    John (New Coll.), ii. 53.
    Rowl., ii. 228.

  Rhees, John David, i. 57, 214; ii. 201.

  Rhonius, ..., ii. 125.

  Rich, Robert, 3rd baron, and Penelope (Sydney), baroness, ii. 250,
        251.

  Richardson, Sir Tho., i. 170.

  Richelieu, card., i. 66, 77.

  Richmond, Surrey, ii. 166, 177, 265.

  Richmond, (Stuart), duke of--
    -- James, 1st duke, and Mary (Villiers), duchess, i. 205.
    -- Charles, 3rd duke, and Frances (Stuart), duchess, ii. 239.

  Rickmansworth, Herts, i. 255.

  Rider, Cardanus, ii. 181.
    John, ii. 201.
    ..., ii. 323.

  Ridgely, _see_ Rugeley.

  Rigby, Rev. ..., ii. 155.

  Riolani, Jean, i. 301, 304.

  Ripley, Geo., i. 163, 168; ii. 201.

  Riven-hall, Essex, ii. 265.

  Robartes of Truro, John, baron, ii. 203.

  Roberts, Geo. (D.D., Trin. Coll., Oxf., 1642), i. 173.

  Robinson, John, ii. 75, 298.

  Robson, Mr., ii. 203.

  Rochester, (Wilmot), earl of--
    -- Henry, 1st earl, ii. 32.
    ---- Anne (St. John), co. of, ii. 31, 32.
    -- John, 2nd earl, i. 134, 211, 219; ii. 30, 32, 34, 54, 304.
    ---- Eliz. (Malet), co. of, i. 219; ii. 304.

  Rocklington, Sir John, ii. 202.

  Rogers family, i. 389.
    Mr., ii. 202.

  Rolle, Henry, ii. 203.

  Rollington (Rowlington) park, Wilts., i. 262, 311.

  Rollwright, Oxon., ii. 330.

  Rome, i. 39, 57, 120, 226, 247, 249; ii. 79, 169.

  Romsey, Hants., ii. 139, 144, 148.

  Rooke, Laur., i. 366; ii. 204, 284, 288, 314.

  Roper, Chr., John, Sir Will., ii. 83.

  Ros, Robert de, ii. 13.

  Ros, John Manners (afterwards 10th earl of Rutland), lord, i. 138.

  Rose, Mr., i. 230.

  Ross, John Lesley, bp. of, i. 58.

  Rotterdam, i. 246, 248; ii. 135.

  Roundway Down, Wilts., i. 151.

  Royal Society of London, i. 40, 115, 129, 201, 228, 268, 269, 285,
        336, 354, 362, 371, 372, 409-415; ii. 60, 80, 82, 97, 134, 143,
        144, 147, 149, 165, 166, 169, 178, 205, 281, 288, 301, 313, 314,
        322.

  Roydon, Mr., i. 284.

  Royston, Mr., i. 427.

  Ruddyer, Ben., i. 8, 318, 418; ii. 185.

  Rugeley (Ridgely), Luke, i. 143, 195.
    Tho., i. 143.

  Ruggle, Geo., i. 180.

  Rumsey, Walt., ii. 206.

  Runnymead, Surrey, i. 220.

  Rupert, prince, i. 104, 256; ii. 237, 238.

  Rushworth, John, i. 107; ii. 207.

  Russell, Mr., ii. 64, 65.

  Russia (Muscovia), i. 213, 233; ii. 71, 199.

  Rutland, (Manners), earl of--
    -- Roger, 5th earl, ii. 250.
    ---- Eliz. (Sydney), co. of, i. 96; ii. 250.
    -- John, 10th earl, i. 230; ii. 364.

  Rutt, Mr., ii. 279.

  Rutter, Jos., ii. 210.

  Rymer, Tho., i. 364.

  Ryves, Kath., i. 39, 47.


  Sacrobosco, Joannes de, i. 408.

  St. Albans, Herts, i. 66, 71, 78, 108, 110; ii. 42, 311.

  St. Albans, Francis Bacon, visc., i. 67, 69, 76.

  St. Albans, Henry Jermyn, earl of, i. 189, 190, 205.

  St. Amant, ..., ii. 154.

  St. George, Sir Henry, i. 53, 65, 146.

  St. Helena, i. 283.

  St. John, Anne, Sir John, ii. 31.

  Saintlowe, John, i. 31.
    Laur., ii. 19, 26.
    ..., ii. 96.

  Salisbury (New Sarum), Wilts., i. 48, 95, 105, 169, 215, 244, 305,
        311, 316; ii. 28, 39, 76, 104, 218, 248, 253, 260, 288.

  Salisbury cathedral, i. 172, 198, 199, 200, 202, 309, 312; ii. 288,
        312, 313.

  Salisbury, see of, ii. 183, 202, 211, 289.

  Salisbury, (Cecil), earl of--
    -- Rob., 1st earl, i. 93, 175-177, 311; ii. 52, 95, 186.
    -- Will., 2nd earl, i. 191.

  Salkeld, Will., i. 48.

  Salmasius, Claude, ii. 66, 71.

  Salmon, Dr., i. 31.
    Mrs., ii. 153.

  Salter, lady, i. 279, 281.

  Sambroke, Fran., i. 309.
    ..., i. 302, 303.

  Samwell (Samuel), Will., i. 288, 294.
    ..., i. 293.

  Sanchy, Sir Jerome, ii. 148.

  Sanderson, bp. Rob., ii. 123, 211, 259.

  Sandwich, Kent, ii. 28.

  Sandys, Sir Edwin, i. 69.
    Geo., i. 36, 151; ii. 212.

  Sanford, Henry, i. 311.

  Sarney, ..., i. 41.

  Saul, Mr., ii. 272.

  Saunders, Mr., i. 137.

  Saunderson, Will., ii. 213.

  Savile, Sir Henry, i. 69, 118, 123, 212, 222, 279; ii. 214, 281.

  Saxe-Weimar, ii. 87.

  Saxton, Mr., ii. 95.

  Saye and Sele, (Fiennes), lord--
    -- Edw., 5th baron, i. 235.
    -- Will., 1st visc., i. 88, 89; ii. 23, 300.

  Scaliger, Jos. Justus, i. 333; ii. 214, 215.
    Jul. Caes., i. 106, 249.

  Scanderoon, i.e. Alexandria, i. 224, 227.

  Scarborough, Sir Chas., i. 94, 299, 303, 355, 361, 369; ii. 107, 108,
        112-114, 126, 284, 285, 313.

  Scargill, Dan., i. 360, 362.

  Scory, John, Sylvanus, ii. 216.

  Scotland and Scots, i. 31, 58, 65, 66, 70, 73, 75, 86, 94, 123, 180,
        192, 268, 365, 397, 421; ii. 4, 46, 74, 81, 82, 90, 186, 187,
        241, 245, 253, 269.

  Scotus, Joannes, i. 391.

  Scrope, Sir Adrian, i. 297.
    Sir Carr, ii. 279.
    John, ii. 196.

  Scudamore, John, 1st visc., i. 28; ii. 188, 259.
    John, 2nd visc., i. 28.

  Securis, John, ii. 218.

  Sedley, Sir Chas., ii. 215.

  Seend, Wilts., i. 40.

  Seile, H., i. 275.

  Selby, Dorothy, ii. 218.
    Sir John, ii. 115.

  Selden, John, i. 16, 84, 137, 138, 180, 239, 242, 337, 365, 369; ii.
        219-225, 255, 311.

  Seymour, Sir Edw., ii. 286.

  Seymour of Trowbridge, Chas., 2nd baron, i. 43.

  Shadwell, Tho., i. 52, 136; ii. 226.

  Shaftesbury, Dors., ii. 76, 163.

  Shaftesbury, Anth. A. Cooper, 1st earl, i. 182, 303, 305.

  Shakespear, Will., i. 97, 204; ii. 225.

  Shannon, Fran. Boyle, 1st visc., i. 118.

  Sharp, John, ii. 127.

  Shelburne, Eliz. Petty, viscountess, ii. 148, 149.

  Shelburne, Chas. Petty, baron, ii. 149.

  Sheldon, Frances, ii. 227.
    Gilb., ii. 8, 123, 124, 127, 131.
    Ralph, i. 42; ii. 4, 73, 79, 81, 115, 173, 175, 227, 245.

  Shepherd, Fleetwood, i. 21; ii. 34.

  Sherborne, Dors., i. 188, 227; ii. 183, 192, 193.

  Sherburne, Edw., i. 8, 16, 103, 306; ii. 13, 79, 178, 205, 227, 228,
        230.
    John, ii. 227.
    Will., i. 204.

  Sherston, Mr., ii. 173.

  Shervill, Mr., i. 244.

  Shipey, Mr., i. 97.

  Shippon, L., i. 193.

  Shirburne, _see_ Sherborne.

  Shirley, Jas., ii. 228.
    Thos., ii. 228.

  Shirman, Mr., i. 274, 275.

  Shore, Jane, ii. 244.

  Short-hand, i. 272, 273; ii. 197, 302.

  Shrewsbury, i. 145; ii. 256.

  Shrewsbury, Gilb. Talbot, 7th earl, i. 245; ii. 224, 225, 323.

  Shrivenham, Berks., ii. 47.

  Shropshire, ii. 329.

  Shuter, Mr., i. 57, 58.

  Sibthorpe, Rob., i. 334.

  Singleton, Mr., ii. 249.

  'Sir,' a clergyman's title, i. 97, 168, 323, 391, 422; ii. 317.

  Sitsilt family, i. 158.

  Skidmore of Kenchurch, i. 267.

  Skinner, Cyriac, i. 290; ii. 72.
    Matt., i. 86.
    Bp. Rob., ii. 12, 25, 214.
    Sir Tho., i. 102.
    ..., ii. 71, 72.

  Sloper, John, i. 28, 278, 279; ii. 105, 113, 228.

  Slusius, Ren. Fran., ii. 58.

  Slymaker, Henry, ii. 25, 27.

  Smethwick, Mr., ii. 108.

  Smyth, Cicely, ii. 173.
    Edm., i. 297.
    Fran., ii. 172, 195.
    Henry (1550-(?)1593), i. 308.
    Jane, i. 191; ii. 229.
    Sir Tho., i. 69; ii. 326.
    (?) Tho., ii. 28.
    Sir Walt., ii. 302, 303.

  Snell, Sir Chas., i. 132; ii. 183.
    Chas., i. 34, 50, 270; ii. 139, 230, 260, 261.

  Snow, Fran., ii. 160.

  Snowdon, Wales, i. 134.

  Snowdon, Mr., ii. 244, 245.

  Soap-making, i. 128; ii. 331.

  Socinianism, i. 150, 272, 279; ii. 136, 243, 244.

  Somerford, Wilts., i. 195.

  Somerset, Rob. Carr, earl of, ii. 183.

  Somerset, (Seymour), duke of--
    -- Will., 1st duke, ii. 202.
    -- Chas., 6th duke, i. 43.

  Somersetshire, i. 262; ii. 51.

  Sorbier, Sam., i. 367.

  Sound, Mr., i. 265.

  Southampton, Thos. Wriothesley, 4th earl of, ii. 187.

  Southcott, lady, ii. 244.

  Southwell, Sir Rob., ii. 149.

  Spain, i. 101, 113, 137, 175, 176, 217, 275, 327, 390; ii. 96, 122,
        145, 183, 189, 240, 297, 331.
    Phil. III, i. 82.
    Phil. IV, ii. 76.
    Spanish coin, i. 131.

  Sparrow, bp. Anth., ii. 115.

  Spectacles, ii. 319.

  Speed, John, i. 147, 326, 392; ii. 67, 230, 232.

  Speidell, John, ii. 231.

  Spelman, Sir Henry, ii. 231, 237.
    Henry, ii. 231, 232.
    Sir John, ii. 232.

  Spelsbury, Oxon., ii. 304.

  Spenser, Edm., i. 240; ii. 191, 232, 248.

  Spenser of Wormleighton, Henry, 3rd baron, ii. 275, 280.

  Spinoza, Benedictus, i. 357.

  Spratt, Thos., i. 190; ii. 322.

  Springett, Sir Will., ii. 134.

  Stadius, Joannes, i. 144, 210.

  Stafford, Dorothy, ii. 234.
    Rob., ii. 233.
    Sir Will., ii. 83.
    Will., ii. 197.
    Will., ii. 233.
    Capt. ..., ii. 196.
    Mr., i. 290.

  Stafford, (Stafford), baron, ii. 247.

  Stalbridge, Dors., i. 121; ii. 27.

  Standish, Henry, i. 249.

  Stanhope of Harrington, John, 1st baron, i. 308.

  Stanley, Sir Edw., i. 229, 233.
    Sir Tho., i. 233.
    Tho. (father), ii. 228, 234.
    Tho. (son), ii. 234.

  Stanmore, Midd., ii. 283.

  Stansby, maj., ii. 187.

  Staper, Rich., ii. 234.

  Stapleton, Tho., ii. 235.

  Stawell, Sir John, i. 44.

  Stedman, Fran., ii. 306.

  Stephanus, ..., i. 279.

  Stephens (Stevens), Edw., i. 278.
    Rich., i. 183.
    Rob., i. 372.
    Tho., i. 36, 111; ii. 235, 311.
    ..., i. 61.

  Sterling, Sam., ii. 136.

  Steyning, Sussex, ii. 121.

  Stillingfleet, Edw., i. 427.

  Stokes, John, i. 193, 386.
    Rich., ii. 108, 236.

  Stonehouse, Sir Geo., ii. 46.

  Stourton, Chas., 7th baron, i. 316, 317.

  Stow, John, i. 101, 192; ii. 189, 232, 236.

  Stradling, Sir Edw., i. 228; ii. 201.

  Strafford, Tho. Wentworth, earl of, i. 115; ii. 101, 102, 186, 207.

  Stratford-on-Avon, Warw., i. 151; ii. 225, 226.

  Street, Thos., ii. 237.

  Stuart, Arabella, i. 57, 66.
    Sir Fran., i. 285; ii. 239.

  Stubbes, Henry, i. 366, 371; ii. 240, 281.

  Stubbing, John, i. 186, 188.

  Stukely, Lewis, ii. 190.

  Stumpe, Tho., i. 8.
    Rev. ..., i. 387.

  Suckling, Sir John, i. 204, 205, 279; ii. 56, 223, 240.

  Suffolk, Henry Grey, 1st duke of, i. 66.

  Suffolk, Tho. Howard, earl of, ii. 52, 98.

  Sumner, Joan, i. 39, 40, 47.
    John, ii. 40.

  Sunderland, Henry Spenser, earl of, ii. 275, 280.

  Surff, cavaliero, ii. 192.

  Surrey, i. 218, 220, 250; ii. 95, 111, 236.

  Surrey, Tho. Holland, duke of, i. 406.

  Surrey, (Howard), earl of--
    -- Henry (the poet), i. 69.
    -- Tho., 4th earl, i. 407, 408; ii. 110, 112.

  Sussex, Edw. Ratcliffe, earl of, Eleanor (Lee), co. of, ii. 198.

  Sutton, Tho., ii. 246.
    Will., i. 29, 36; ii. 246.

  Sweden, i. 222, 376; ii. 81, 257, 324.

  Switzerland, i. 112; ii. 123, 131.

  Sydenham, John, i. 132-134.
    Sir Ralph, ii. 74.

  Sydney, Sir Henry, ii. 247, 250.
    Sir Philip, i. 67, 69, 177, 194, 243, 275, 310-313; ii. 233,
        247-252, 267.
    Tho., ii. 250.

  Sylvester, Edw., i. 204; ii. 300, 303.

  Symonds, ... (S.J.), i. 183; ii. 189.


  Tabor and pipe, ii. 319.

  Talbot, Sharington, i. 245.
    Sir Rob., ii. 252.

  Tandy, Tho., i. 374.

  Tanfield, Laur., i. 149.

  Tanner, Tho., i. 21, 106.
    Will., ii. 330.

  Tap, John, ii. 252.

  Taverner, Rev. ..., i. 51.

  Taylor, John, ii. 252-254.
    Jo<sias>, i. 387; ii. 181.
    Silas, ii. 254-256.

  Temple, Sir Rich., Sir Tho., ii. 211.

  Tew, Great, Oxon., i. 131, 149-152.

  Tewkesbury, Glouc., i. 315.

  Teynham, John Roper, baron, ii. 83.

  Thames river, i. 123.

  Thanet, (Tufton), earl of--
    -- John, 2nd earl, i. 175; ii. 209.
    ---- Marg. (Sackville), co. of, i. 104, 175; ii. 209.
    -- Nic ., 3rd earl, i. 41, 52, 175, 177; ii. 8, 97.
    ---- Eliz. (Boyle), co. of, i. 116, 120, 175-177, 191, 226; ii. 154.
    -- John, 4th earl, and Rich., 5th earl, i. 175.

  Thomas, Edm., ii. 7.
     Sir Rob., i. 136; ii. 5.

  Thomson, Sam., i. 412.

  Thorne, Rich., i. 337.

  Thorndyke, Herb., i. 146; ii. 257, 292, 293.

  Throckmorton, Eliz., ii. 178.

  Thuanus (de Thou), Jacques Auguste, i. 57, 65, 145, 270.

  Thurloe, John, ii. 130.

  Thurlow, Suffolk, i. 103.

  Thynne family, i. 279.

  Thynne, Egremund, i. 424.
    Fran., i. 74.
    Isabella, ii. 24, 25.
    John, i. 219.
    Sir John, ii. 178, 179, 184.

  Tillotson, John, i. 87, 93.

  Tirell, Mary, i. 322, 384, 385, 388.

  Tittinghanger, Herts., i. 108.

  Tobacco, i. 198, 351, 422; ii. 181, 189, 323.

  Toman, Mrs., i. 197.

  Tombes, John, ii. 258-261, 300.

  Tomkins, Nath., ii. 275.

  Tong, Ezerel, i. 94; ii. 261.
    Capt. ..., ii. 261, 262.

  Tonquin, ii. 322.

  Torporley, Nath., i. 287; ii. 263.

  Tottenham, Midd., i. 96; ii. 323.

  Tounson, Rob., i. 202, 203.

  Tovell, Mr., ii. 64.

  Tovy, Mr., ii. 293.

  Townley, Rich., i. 261.
    Mr., i. 285.

  Trapps, lady, i. 102.

  Trenshard, Sir Tho., ii. 297.

  Triplett, John, i. 151.
    Tho., i. 263; ii. 56, 57, 263.

  Troutbeck, Dr., i. 211, 295.

  Tunbridge, Kent, ii. 303.

  Turenne, Henri de, ii. 87.

  Turkey, i. 41, 64, 90, 91, 110, 154, 172, 193, 299; ii. 160.

  Turner, Mr., ii. 126.

  Tuscany, i. 212; ii. 110, 270, 310.

  Tussell, John, i. 178.

  Tusser, Tho., ii. 265.

  Twisse, Will., i. 343; ii. 225, 265.
    Dr. ..., ii. 265.

  Twyne, John, Tho., ii. 266.

  Tyndale, D., ii. 251, 252.
    Stafford, ii. 32.
    Tho., i. 312; ii. 190, 211, 246, 266.
    Mrs., ii. 83, 115.
    Mr., i. 53.

  Tyrconnel, Rich. Talbot, earl of, i. 290.


  Underhill, Sir Tho., i. 71.

  Uniades, Mr., ii. 106.

  Usher, James, i. 307; ii. 219, 221, 233, 268.


  Valke, Jacob de, i. 152.

  Vandyke, Anthony, i. 231, 232; ii. 244.

  Vane, Sir Fran., ii. 209.
    Sir Henry, ii. 45, 47.

  Vanore, Sir Peter, i. 112.

  Vaughan, Henry, ii. 201, 268.
    Sir John, i. 337, 339, 342, 369, 382, 394; ii. 55, 221, 225.
    Lord John, i. 50, 285; ii. 95, 134, 187, 292.
    Tho., ii. 268.
    Mr., ii. 293.
    ..., ii. 30.

  Vaughan of Hergest, i. 267.

  Vavasour, Anne, ii. 31.

  Vawr, Mr., ii. 297.

  Venice, i. 90, 108; ii. 51, 63, 203.

  Venner, Tho., i. 290.

  Verdusius, ..., i. 367.

  Vere family, i. 118.
    Sir Fran. and Sir Horace, i. 192; ii. 192.

  Vernon, Mr., ii. 144, 149.

  Verstegan, Rich., i. 158, 183.

  Verulam, Herts., i. 22, 66, 76-78, 81, 393.

  Verulam, Francis Bacon, baron, i. 66, 76.

  Vesalius, Andr., i. 304, 336, 368; ii. 140.

  Veslingius, Joannes, ii. 148.

  Vicars, John, ii. 174.

  Vienna, i. 301, 407.

  Viet, François, ii. 263.

  Villiers, Fran., ii. 270.
    ..., ii. 17, 19.

  Vinnius, Arnold, ii. 7.

  Virginia, _see_ America.

  Visscher, Will, de, i. 112; ii. 270.

  Vossius, Ger. Jo., ii. 130, 272.
    Isaac, ii. 272.


  Wainfleet, bp. Will., ii. 309.

  Wake, Sir Isaac, ii. 25, 272.

  Wales, i. 51, 55, 56, 59, 60, 158, 211, 307, 315; ii. 5, 118, 147,
        319, 329.
    Welsh language, i. 57, 62, 145, 314, 324; ii. 87, 201, 266, 268,
        321, 328, 329.

  Walker, Anth., i. 116.
    Clem., ii. 273.

  Waller, Edm., i. 136, 138, 139, 151, 217, 357, 358, 366, 367, 369,
        372; ii. 24, 70, 123, 273-280.

  Waller, Eliz., ii. 139, 142.
    Sir Hasdras, ii. 142.
    Rob., ii. 274, 280.
    Walter, i. 51; ii. 86, 275.
    Sir Will., i. 327, 392; ii. 175.
    Mr., ii. 144.

  Wallingford, Berks., ii. 56.

  Wallis, Cornelius, i. 264.
    John, i. 119, 358, 360, 362, 371-373, 377, 378, 404, 405, 415; ii.
        94, 108, 112-114, 214, 215, 280, 286.

  Walpole, Mr., i. 89.

  Walsingham, Sir Fran., i. 61; ii. 249-251.

  Walters, Lucy, ii. 283.

  Walton, Izaak, ii. 14, 16, 17.

  Wansdyke, Wilts., i. 251.

  Ward, Sam., ii. 283, 284, 287.
    Bp. Seth, i. 44, 50, 244, 286, 339, 359, 373, 405; ii. 77, 85, 86,
        107-109, 112, 114, 141, 183, 193, 204-206, 211, 212, 215, 257,
        259, 261, 281, 283-290, 293, 296, 301, 312-314, 316.
    Seth, B.D., ii. 289, 290.

  Wardour, Arundell of, Tho., 2nd baron, i. 129.

  Ware, Herts., ii. 1.

  Warner, bp. John, ii. 307. Walter, i. 16, 286, 287; ii. 15, 16, 188,
        291-293.

  Warwick, ii. 227, 240, 250.

  Warwick, Ambrose Dudley, earl of, ii. 250.

  Warwick, (Rich), earl of--
    -- Rob., 3rd earl, ii. 97.
    ---- (?) Anne (Cavendish), co. of, ii. 123.
    -- Chas., 4th earl, i. 118.
    ---- Mary (Boyle), co. of, i. 115-119.

  Wase, Chr., i. 109, 218, 311, 312; ii. 279.

  Watkins, Rob., ii. 153.

  Watson, Will., ii. 293.

  Watts, Will., i. 187.
    Mr., i. 133.

  Wayte, Mr., i. 329.

  Webbe, bp. Geo., ii. 293.
    J., i. 158.
    Dr., ii. 294.

  Weekes, Mich., i. 268; ii. 181, 236, 294.

  Weldon, Sir Anth., i. 66, 67, 202.

  Welles, John, visc., ii. 295.

  Wellington, Som., ii. 160.

  Wells, Cath., ii. 295.
    John, ii. 294.
    Mr., i. 107, 162, 163.

  Wells, Som., ii. 88, 170.
    Wells cathedral, i. 229; ii. 319.

  Welsh, _see_ Wales.

  Welsted, Rob., i. 53.

  Wenman, Sir Fran., i. 151.
    Tho., 2nd visc., ii. 285.
    Mr., ii. 223.

  West, John, ii. 51.

  Westbury, Som., i. 147.

  Weston, Warw., i. 42; ii. 227.

  Westphaling, bp. Herb., ii. 216.

  Westport, Wilts., i. 50, 322-328, 387-393.

  Wgan, Mr., i. 313; ii. 153, 155.

  Wharton, Geo., i. 126, 213; ii. 295.
    Tho., i. 210.

  Wharton, Phil., 4th baron, ii. 31.
    Tho., 5th baron, ii. 31, and Anne (Lee), baroness, ii. 30-32.

  Wheare, Chas., i. 204.
    Degory, i. 194, 204; ii. 191, 296.

  Wheeler, Rich., ii. 298.

  Wheldon, Jas., i. 349, 351, 355, 358, 378-386, 395.

  Wheloc, Abr., ii. 296.

  Whipping undergraduates, ii. 65, 171.

  Whistler, Dan., ii. 17, 127, 128, 187, 296.
    John, ii. 18.

  Whitby, Oliver, i. 172, 174.

  Whitchcot, Dr., i. 124.

  White, Rich., i. 8, 369; ii. 299.
    Sir Sampson, ii. 7.
    Tho. ('de Albiis'), i. 227, 369; ii. 299.

  Whitefoot, Rev. ..., i. 210.

  Whitehead, friar, i. 203.
    Geo., ii. 131.

  Whitelock, Bulstrode, ii. 33, 220.

  Whitford, David, ii. 102.

  Whitgift, John, i. 56.

  Whitney, James, i. 122, 184, 225, 314, 426; ii. 30, 188, 194, 297.

  Whitson, John, i. 51, 299, 315; ii. 297.

  Widdrington, Ralph, i. 90.

  Wight, Isle of, ii. 95, 144.

  Wilby, ..., ii. 62.

  Wild, _see_ Wylde.

  Wildman, John, i. 290.

  Wilkins, John, i. 218, 410; ii. 46, 141, 258, 285, 288, 299, 302, 328.
    Tim., ii. 300.

  Wilkinson, John, i. 330, 393.

  Williams, bp. John, ii. 129.

  Williamson, Sir Jos., i. 58, 201; ii. 8.
    Mrs., ii. 220.

  Willis, John, ii. 302.
    Tho., i. 39, 410; ii. 141, 302-304.

  Willoughby of Parham, Fran., baron, i. 156.

  Wilmot, Henry, baron, and Anne (St. John), baroness, ii. 32.

  Wilton, Wilts., i. 105; ii. 54, 90.
    Wilton abbey, i. 315, 316.
    Wilton house, i. 60, 218, 247, 311, 312, 317, 320.

  Wiltshire, i. 52, 332; ii. 181, 317, 324, 334.
    Pronunciation, i. 324, 354.
    Drunkenness, i. 325; ii. 339.
    Aubrey's Wiltshire collections, i. 42, 44.

  Winchester (Winton), i. 221; ii. 309.

  Winchester College, i. 183, 203, 305, 417, 425; ii. 265, 266.

  Winchilsea, Heneage Finch, 2nd earl of, i. 419.

  Windsor, Berks., i. 232, 279, 280; ii. 4, 16, 28, 45, 272.

  Wingate, Edmund, i. 15; ii. 302.

  Winslow, Bucks., ii. 311.

  Wiseman, Mary, i. 46, 50, 52.
    Rob., i. 47, 388; ii. 9.
    Sir W., ii. 13.

  Witherborne, Dr., i. 75.

  Withers, Geo., i. 221; ii. 174, 306.

  Wodenote (Woodnoth), Theophilus (sen.), i. 139. 281; ii. 203, 307.
    Theoph. (jun.), i. 245, 308.

  Wokey-hole, Som., i. 132.

  Wolsely, Chas., i. 290.

  Wolsey, Tho., ii. 308-311.

  Wood, Anthony, ii. 311, and _passim_.
    Edw., i. 1, 280; ii. 177.
    Dr. Rob., i. 120, 290, 295; ii. 112, 113, 141, 147.

  Woodcock, Kath., ii. 65.

  Woodford, Sam., ii. 233.

  Woodgate, Peter, i. 419.

  Woodstock, Oxon., i. 170, 185; ii. 30, 304.

  Wootton Bassett, Wilts., i. 124.

  Worcester, i. 135, 281, 409; ii. 162, 236, 329.
    Cathedral, ii. 161, 255.

  Worcester, (Somerset), earl of, i. 314; ii. 328.

  Wotton, Sir Henry, i. 76, 418, 419; ii. 63.

  Wotton, baron, i. 285, 287.

  Wren, pedigree of, ii. 312.

  Wren, Dr. Chr. (father), i. 31, 403; ii. 312.
    Sir Chr., i. 41, 200, 219, 354, 371, 403, 405; ii. 80, 105, 108,
        112, 165, 166, 175, 214, 218, 282, 311-313.
    Matt., ii. 312.

  Wright, Edward (Edmund), i. 176; ii. 80, 313-316.
    Rich., ii. 276.

  Wyatt, Sir Tho., i. 69.
    Lady ..., ii. 212.

  Wych, Sir Cyril, ii. 128.

  Wychwood forest, Oxon., ii. 30.

  Wycomb (Wicamb, Wickham), Bucks., i. 253; ii. 36, 39, 274, 275, 278,
        280.

  Wylde (Wild), Sir Edmund, i. 230, 232.
    Edmund, i. 4, 41, 43, 109, 134, 160, 181, 251, 255; ii. 4, 35, 37,
        46, 56, 79, 93, 96, 133, 141, 142, 166, 187, 191, 230, 273,
        276, 316, 320, 329, 332.
    Geo., i. 178, 180, 232.
    Sir John, i. 178, 180, 285; ii. 272, 273.
    Will., ii. 77.

  Wyndham, Sir Fran., i. 77.
    Sir Wadham, i. 217, 244, 316.


  Yarrington, capt., ii. 316.

  Yates, John. ii. 216.
    Leonard, ii. 214, 216.

  Yatton-Keynell, Wilts., i. 33, 146; ii. 183.

  York, i. 108, 206, 207; ii. 208.

  Yorkshire, i. 159, 261, 267; ii. 14, 28, 324.

  York, James, duke of, i. 196, 208, 218, 219, 297, 369; ii. 78, 102,
        132-134, 323, 324.
    _See_ James II.

  York, Anne (Hyde), duchess of, ii. 316.
    Maria, duchess of, ii. 276.

  Young, John, ii. 13, 242-244.


  Zeigler, Caspar, i. 375, 376.

  Zouch, Sir Edw., ii. 203.
    Rich., i. 57, 58, 65; ii. 281.

  Zurich, ii. 123, 125.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 42ᵛ.

[2] See infra, _sub nomine_.

[3] Subst. for 'there was a statue due for the.'

[4] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 135: 6 Aug. 1671.

[5] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 90. Aubrey gives the coat, 'or, a pile azure
between 2 escallops ...'

[6] i.e. in St. Katherine Coleman's.

[7] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 90ᵛ.

[8] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 89.

[9] This title is in the handwriting of Anthony Wood: the letter is the
original.

[10] i.e. add.

[11] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 9.

[12] A slip: the 'chronologer' was his son.

[13] The ballad-book at Ralph Sheldon's.

[14] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 11.

[15] Subst. for 'physician to queen Anne or prince Henry: quaere E. W.:
vide φ,' a MS. not yet identified.

[16] Probably Edmund Wyld.

[17] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 27.

[18] These words are scored through.

[19] These words are scored out.

[20] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 128: Nov. 17, 1670.

[21] Wood notes 'vide Dugdale's _Orig. Jurid._'

[22] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 160: Jan. 16, 1671/2.

[23] Dupl. with 'few yeares.'

[24] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 160ᵛ.

[25] Wood corrects to 'December.'

[26] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 183: Aug. 19, 1672.

[27] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 25. Aubrey gives in trick the coat: '<argent>, a
chevron, between 3 <cocks gules>.'

[28] Dupl. with 'studied.'

[29] Subst. for 'late.'

[30] Added by Anthony Wood.

[31] MS. Ballard 14, fol. 137; a letter from Aubrey to Anthony Wood,
dated June 26, 1683.

[32] Baron of the Exchequer 1675, Justice of the Common Pleas 1678-1679.

[33] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 38ᵛ.

[34] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 19.

[35] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 20.

[36] MS. Aubr. 23, a slip at fol. 103ᵛ.

[37] The words in square brackets are scored out, being in error. The
reference is to Thomas Jones, intruded Fellow of Univ. Coll. 1649, M.A.
Feb. 20, 1650/1. He was not B.D.

[38] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 108.

[39] The note in square brackets is a later, marginal addition.

[40] i.e. step-father.

[41] Subst. for 'war.'

[42] Aubrey tricks it in the margin, 'argent, 3 water bougets gules.'
In MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 5ᵛ, is the note:--'Ben Johnson is just opposite
Robertus de Ros.'

[43] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 108ᵛ.

[44] Aubrey generally spells the name Johnson. Here the H is scored
out, as also are the words in square brackets.

[45] MS. Aubr. 8, fol 15.

[46] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 45ᵛ.

[47] This note comes after the note about W. Beeston (vol. i. p. 97),
which ended 'Quaere etiam for Ben Jonson.' This note about Jonson's
eyes may therefore come from that 'chronicle of the stage,' as reported
to Aubrey by John Lacy.

[48] Subst. for 'dialect.'

[49] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 54.

[50] Dupl. with 'words.'

[51] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 55.

[52] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 107ᵛ.

[53] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 107.

[54] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 107ᵛ.

[55] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 14ᵛ.

[56] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 57.

[57] See _sub nomine_, Daniel Whistler.

[58] Subst. for 'gray.'

[59] '36' in MS., with 'quaere' in the margin; Aubrey having forgot the
number.

[60] The remainder of the paragraph is in the margin of the MS., an
amplification of the preceding sentence.

[61] Dupl. with 'Mr.'

[62] John Whistler, recorder of Oxford City.

[63] Sir John Denham, Chief Justice of the King's Bench in Ireland,
1612.

[64] Subst. for 'returne it.'

[65] Laud had done this at All Souls, where he was Visitor.

[66] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 57ᵛ.

[67] Subst. for 'severall good gentlemen.'

[68] Subst. for 'happy.'

[69] i.e. sweet.

[70]? to jibe Aubrey in College for having 'a sweet tooth.'

[71] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 58.

[72] See _sub nomine_, William Radford.

[73] Aubrey always writes the word so, probably as a contraction for
'grandmother.'

[74] Subst. for 'this crowe.'

[75] i.e. he had a trick of using the expression 'now come we.'

[76] Scored out, Aubrey apparently doubting whether it was, or was not,
the right foot.

[77] for 'co-founder.'

[78] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 58ᵛ.

[79] Subst. for 'bring this liquour.'

[80] Subst. for 'when a neighbour.'

[81] Robert Harris, intruded President of Trinity, 1648-1658.

[82] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 57.

[83] MS. Aubr. 6. fol. 59ᵛ.

[84] i.e. belonging to the College chapel.

[85] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 58ᵛ.

[86] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 59.

[87] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 59ᵛ.

[88] An error. Robert Abbot was never Vice-Chancellor. His brother
George Abbot, afterwards archbishop of Canterbury, was Vice-Chancellor
three times, in 1600, 1603, 1605.

[89] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 400: March 31, 1690.

[90] Henry Birkhead, matric. at Trin. 1634, aet. 16; died 1696.

[91] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 5.

[92] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 61ᵛ--a note from Kitson himself.

[93] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 12.

[94] Anthony Wood notes, 'The poem cal'd Lepanto was written by King
James.'

[95] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 20ᵛ.

[96] Charles Gerard, in 1645 baron Gerard of Brandon, in 1679 earl of
Macclesfield.

[97] Dupl. with 'good.'

[98] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 27ᵛ.

[99] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 91ᵛ. Aubrey gives the arms in trick, viz.,
'argent, a fess between 3 crescents sable.'

[100] Sir Edward Henry Lee, 5th baronet created earl of Litchfield in
1674.

[101] Thomas Johnes, instituted to Wootton, Dec. 8, 1609.

[102] Four lines are suppressed.

[103] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 92: found also in a fragmentary jotting, in MS.
Aubr. 8, fol. 8ᵛ.

[104] K.G.; obiit 1610/1.

[105] Obiit 1631.

[106] Sir Francis Henry Lee, obiit circ. 1640. Henry, his elder
brother, died in infancy.

[107] Obiit 1659.

[108] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 93.

[109] A step is missing here: cp. the preceding pedigree.

[110] This is an error. Sir Edward Henry Lee, created earl of
Litchfield, was son of Sir Francis Henry Lee (_m._ Elizabeth Pope),
younger brother of Sir Henry Lee (_m._ Anne Danvers).

[111] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 32.

[112] An error. William Lee was of Christ's College, Cambridge.

[113] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 86.

[114] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 10ᵛ.

[115] Subst. for 'Hersham Church.'

[116] '1601' is inserted by Anthony Wood.

[117] Bulstrode Whitelocke.

[118] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 45ᵛ.

[119] Nov. 1680--Jan. 1680/1: see Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, ii.
503, 504.

[120] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 122.

[121] Aubrey's estimate of its probable cost.

[122] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 49ᵛ.

[123] i.e. 1674.

[124] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 83.

[125] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 9ᵛ.

[126] i.e. F.R.S.

[127] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 390: July 15, 1689.

[128] Dupl. with 'businesse.'

[129] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 81ᵛ.

[130] Wood MS. F. 39, fol. 381: a communication 'from <George>
Llewellin, commoner of Merton College, son of Dr. Martin Llewellin, 18
Mar. 1686/7.'

[131] Aubrey in Wood MS. F. 39, fol. 379ᵛ: Sept. 25, 1686. Aubrey gives
the inscription (printed in Wood's _Ath. Oxon._), and the coat of arms,
'..., a lion rampant crowned ...; impaling, ..., a lion rampant ..., a
hand in the lyon's mouth, within a bordure ermine.'

[132] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 21.

[133] Ben Jonson's phrase, _supra_, i. p. 232.

[134] Dorothy.

[135] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 9.

[136] Ovid. _Metam._ iii. 420-423: fabula VI--Narcissus.

[137] In error for 1659.

[138] Matric. June 27, 1634, aged 16: eldest son of William, 'armiger,'
of Woolwich, Kent.

[139] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 77.

[140] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 84.

[141] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 84ᵛ.

[142] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 141ᵛ: Oct. 27, 1671.

[143] See Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iv. 281.

[144] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 142.

[145] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 141ᵛ.

[146] i.e. Henry and Thomas (obiit 1639?) Lyte, father and son.

[147] Ibid., fol. 210: May 24, 1673.

[148] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 82.

[149] Tuesday.

[150] MS. Aubr. 3, fol. 217.

[151] A slip at fol. 47 of MS. Aubr. 23, has the first draft of this
note:--'Captain Pugh assures me that Sir John Mandeville lies buryed at
Liège--quod N. B.'

[152] See vol. i. p. 65.

[153] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 102ᵛ.

[154] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 59: given also on fol. 121 of MS. Aubr. 23, as
taken from Dr. Richard Napier's papers.

[155] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 103.

[156] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 12ᵛ.

[157] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 103. Aubrey gives in trick the coat, 'argent, 2
bars gules, each charged with 3 besants.'

[158] Matric. at Univ. Coll. Oct. 31, 1617, aged 15; took B.A. Jan. 24,
1619/20.

[159] Subst. for 'a pretty wench.'

[160] The king.

[161] Martin. The preceding clause explains why, having this character,
Martin took the side of the Parliament.

[162] Dupl. with 'About a year after.'

[163] Subst. for 'custome.'

[164] 'Sate,' by a slip, in the MS.

[165] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 12ᵛ.

[166] Dupl. with 'spued.'

[167] Probably Edmund Wyld.

[168] Dupl. with 'his aunt's husband.'

[169] i.e. Richard Cromwell's.

[170] Apparently a memorandum to recall a story about Martin. There is
similarly a memorandum to recall an indecent story, at the foot of fol.
103 of MS. Aubr. 6.

[171] Inserted by Anthony Wood.

[172] So Aubrey often spells it.

[173] 'Blind from his birth,' S. John ix. 2; 'born blind,' S. John ix.
19, etc. Martin remembered 'lame from his mother's womb' of Acts iii. 2.

[174] S. John ix. 18, 'He had been blind and received his sight,' seems
the nearest expression. The 'restored' is a figment of Martin's own, to
give point to his jest.

[175] Scattered notes on fol. 103 of MS. Aubr. 6.

[176] Edited by Edmund Gayton.

[177] Aubrey in MS. Rawl. D. 727, fol. 96.

[178] Appointed in Sept. 1618, died Oct. 31, 1618.

[179] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 18.

[180] Aubrey here put down a memorandum, 'Paste on his picture here';
and added a note of its fulfilment, ''tis donne,' scil. when he
inserted fol. 17 (see note 2).

[181] i.e. Sept. 2.

[182] Brooke.

[183] Donne.

[184] Cranefield.

[185] Phillips.

[186] Nevile, alluding to the family motto 'Ne vile velis.'

[187] Conyoke.

[188] John Hoskins, _quasi_ 'hose-kin.'

[189] Martin; _supra_, p. 47.

[190] Goodyear.

[191] West.

[192] Holland; _supra_, i. p. 406.

[193] Inigo Jones.

[194] Tom Coryat, i. 188.

[195] Thomas Egerton, lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor 1603-1617.

[196] Robert Cecil, earl of Salisbury, Lord Treasurer 1609-1612.

[197] Henry Howard, earl of Northampton, Lord Privy Seal 1608-1614.

[198] Thomas Howard, earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain of the Household
1603-1613.

[199] This attribution of the piece to Hoskyns is from Mr. Madan's MS.;
see _supra_, p. 50.

[200] John Reynolds, Fellow of New College 1600, died 1614.

[201] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 104. Aubrey, in the margin, draws a wreath of
laurel, for a poet.

[202] This sentence is subst. for 'He was a man of very few words.'

[203] Anthony Wood notes in the margin 'E. of Roff.', a reminder to
himself to incorporate this criticism in the life of Rochester in the
_Athenae_.

[204] This paragraph was added some time after the above notice was
written.

[205] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 171; May, 1672.

[206] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 252: Jan. 31, 1673/4.

[207] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 27.

[208] Subst. for 'to be Poet Laureate.'

[209] See i. p. 110.

[210] See i. p. 289.

[211] A mock-epitaph on May is found among Anthony Wood's papers in
Wood MS. F. 39, fol. 154.

[212] Dupl. with 'odorem.'

[213] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 42ᵛ.

[214] ? court.

[215] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 414: Febr. 1, 1690/1.

[216] Subst. for 'for a.'

[217] In Westminster Abbey.

[218] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 155ᵛ: Dec. 30, 1671.

[219] i.e. beside Camden's monument, _supra_, i. p. 145. Anthony Wood
notes here that this inscription for May was 'made by Marchmount
Needam.'

[220] This latter part of the inscription is found also in MS. Aubr.
23, fol. 103ᵛ.

[221] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 59.

[222] 'darke' written over 'grey,' as a correction.

[223] i.e. more than an inch thick.

[224] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 96ᵛ.

[225] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 178ᵛ: July 6, 1672.

[226] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 82.

[227] i.e. MS. Aubr. 4.

[228] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 6.

[229] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 43.

[230] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 42ᵛ.

[231] See _supra_, p. 1.

[232] MS. Aubr. 6, fol 60ᵛ.

[233] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63.

[234] Subst. for 'barister.'

[235] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 68ᵛ.

[236] Inserted later in answer to the following question:--'quaere, if
he has not a son.'

[237] Christopher Milton.

[238] i.e. Foresthill.

[239] The Milton family.

[240] Shotover forest.

[241] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63.

[242] Subst. for 'Whateley,' i.e. Wheatley.

[243] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 64.

[244] Subst. for 'in that yeare that the army marched thorough the
city.'

[245] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63.

[246] Subst. for 'at the Rose: he had also there another house.'

[247] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 64.

[248] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 65.

[249] This paragraph is not in Aubrey's hand; ? Christopher Milton's.
Anthony Wood grumbles here: 'Why do you not set downe where John Milton
was borne?' forgetting fol. 63.

[250] i.e. Friday.

[251] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63.

[252] Subst. for 'Dr.'

[253] i.e. as a 'pensioner,' and not holding any exhibition or
scholarship.

[254] Subst. for 'very young (scilicet, about thirteen was the most).'

[255] Aubrey, writing on June 29, 1689, says: 'Mr. Edward Philips tells
me his uncle, John Milton, was Master of Arts of Cambridge, of Christ's
College. He was never of Oxford': Wood MS. F. 39, fol. 386ᵛ.

[256] Subst. for 'with Carolo Diodati, ... son of the learned Dr.
Deodati of Geneva.'

[257] 'beyond sea' followed: scored out.

[258] Subst. for 'returned a very little before the civill warres
brake-out.'

[259] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 64.

[260] MS. Aubr. 8, fol 64ᵛ.

[261] This is not in Aubrey's hand; perhaps in Edward Phillips' writing.

[262] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63.

[263] 'and Hebrew' followed: scored out.

[264] Mary Powell. The words in brackets have been substituted for
'He parted from her'; the second half of the sentence has been left
unchanged.

[265] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 68.

[266] Subst. for 'Different religions.'

[267] Space left for an adjective, like 'zealous.'

[268] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 66. This paragraph was added later by Aubrey,
perhaps from information supplied by E. Phillips.

[269] 'Dancing, etc.,' is written over, in explanation.

[270] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 68ᵛ.

[271] Probably Edward Phillips.

[272] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63.

[273] 'Second' underlined for correction to 'third.' For the same
reason the note on fol. 68 is erased: 'He maried Elizabeth ..., second
wife, anno Domini 16--.'

[274] Subst. for 'to Oliver Cromwell.'

[275] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 66ᵛ.

[276] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 68.

[277] Dupl. with 'quite.'

[278] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63.

[279] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 68.

[280] The London bookseller. The words in brackets were added later,
when Aubrey found that the MS. had passed from E. Phillips to Pitt.

[281] Subst. for 'He died of a feaver, at his house in Quin Street,
about the 64th yeare of his age.'

[282] Dupl. with 'stone.'

[283] Dupl. with 'dwelt.'

[284] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63.

[285] 'Abroun' = auburn. Subst. for 'a light browne.'

[286] Subst. for 'very.'

[287] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63ᵛ.

[288] Subst. for 'great.'

[289] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 68.

[290] Subst. for 'an extraordinary.'

[291] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63ᵛ.

[292] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 68. The note was written in pencil, from
Dryden's information, over the verso of one leaf and the recto of the
next; and then inked over. Foll. 64-67 were inserted later.

[293] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 66ᵛ.

[294] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63.

[295] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63ᵛ.

[296] i.e. at 4 A.M., for more than half an hour.

[297] Subst. for 'thought.'

[298] Subst. for 'a mercer.'

[299] 'and at' is subst. for 'e.g.'

[300] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 65.

[301] Subst. for:--'From Mr. E. Philips:--his invention was much more
free and easie in the aequinoxes than at the solstices, as he more
particularly found in writing his Paradise Lost. Mr. Edward Philipps
his nephew and then amanuensis, hath....'

[302] Subst. for '2ᵈ or 3.'

[303] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 65ᵛ.

[304] This paragraph is not in Aubrey's hand.

[305] Dupl. with 'captaines.'

[306] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 66ᵛ.

[307] 'Coeli' followed: scored out.

[308] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 68.

[309] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 372: May, 1684.

[310] i.e. MS. Aubr. 8, then in Anthony Wood's hands.

[311] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 68.

[312] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 64. I am doubtful whether this list is in
Aubrey's hand.

[313] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 68ᵛ.

[314] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 66ᵛ.

[315] i.e. by Allam. This was Anthony Wood's friend (obiit 1685), who
helped with notices of contemporary writers: Clark's Wood's _Life and
Times_, iv. 90.

[316] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 63ᵛ.

[317] Dupl. with 'grant.'

[318] Dupl. with 'were diametrically opposed.'

[319] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 17.

[320] Anthony Wood expands to 'Monke.'

[321] Very probably the (MS.?) collection at Ralph Sheldon's: _supra_,
p. 4.

[322] It is fol. 18 of MS. Aubr. 6. 'A | letter | from his |
excellencie | the | lord general Monck | and the officers under his
command | to the | Parliament; | in the name of themselves, and the
souldiers | under them:' printed by John Macock, 1660, 8 leaves,
small 4to. It begins: 'Mr. Speaker, We cannot but with thankfulness
acknowledge the wonderful goodness ...,' and is dated from 'White-hal,
Feb. 11, 1659.'

[323] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 17ᵛ.

[324] Dupl. with 'noises.'

[325] 'On horseback' subst. for 'of dores.'

[326] Subst. for 'burned.'

[327] 'Many there were' followed: scored out.

[328] 'Haec' in the Vulgate.

[329] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 19.

[330] Died Dec. 17, 1661.

[331] Dupl. with 'hold a correspondence.'

[332] Added later. And then Aubrey struck out 'hath' in the preceding
memo.

[333] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 12ᵛ.

[334] See _supra_, p. 4.

[335] i.e. Duke of York.

[336] Subst. for 'to his highnesse.'

[337] Notes on fol. 96 of MS. Aubr. 6, perhaps added later than the
body of the notice.

[338] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 96.

[339] William Milbourne.

[340] 'so' subst. for 'for.'

[341] 'a youth' subst. for 'one.'

[342] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 53.

[343] A note of Aubrey's conversation with him that morning is found in
a letter dated July 5, 1673, cited under Henry and Thomas Vaughan.

[344] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 96ᵛ.

[345] Dupl. with 'fashion.'

[346] Dupl. with 'by.'

[347] Five lines of text are here suppressed.

[348] _Rectius_ from whose younger brother Christopher Roper;
Christopher's son, Sir John Roper, being created baron Teynham in 1616.

[349] Dupl. with 'when she looked on his head.'

[350] Dupl. with 'been.'

[351] In the Civil War. This story is told by Aubrey in a letter to
Anthony Wood, Jan. 16, 1671/2: MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 160ᵛ.

[352] i.e. MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 97ᵛ; see in the life of Thomas Pigot,
_infra_.

[353] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 42.

[354] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5.

[355] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 60ᵛ.

[356] Subst. for 'well.'

[357] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 14: the part in square brackets is Howe's
autograph.

[358] Probably Thomas Jones; _supra_, p. 11.

[359] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 15.

[360] Subst. for 'not much above.'

[361] In the index to MS. Aubr. 6, he is referred to as 'little Sir
Thomas Morgan, the great soldier.'

[362] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 15.

[363] A slip for 'Mr.,' as infra.

[364] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 18.

[365] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 48ᵛ.

[366] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 49.

[367] i.e. Twelfth-day.

[368] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 49ᵛ.

[369] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 18ᵛ.

[370] i.e. the shield, the coat of arms.

[371] Aubrey in MS. Wood, F. 39, fol. 397: Aug. 4, 1687.

[372] Given in trick.

[373] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 83ᵛ.

[374] Subst. for 'water.'

[375] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 9.

[376] Aubrey's brother, see _supra_, p. 54.

[377] Philip Gwyn, rector of Wilton St. Mary, Wilts, 1664.

[378] MS. Aubr. 21, fol. 77.

[379] i.e. dress.

[380] i.e. 'printseller by the Royal Exchange,' this note following
that given under Silas Taylor.

[381] i.e. these memoirs and collections.

[382] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 28ᵛ.

[383] March 25, 1680, was a Thursday.

[384] Subst. for 'Dockery.' An interlinear note, 'He was heretofore
clarke of the Committee of Indempnity,' is also scored out.

[385] William Dockwra; Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iii. 31, 310.

[386] This paragraph is not in Aubrey's hand. Perhaps written for
Aubrey by Murray himself.

[387] . ? contrived.

[388] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 121.

[389] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 386ᵛ.

[390] Ibid., fol. 390: July 15, 1689.

[391] MS. Aubr. 21, fol. 90.

[392] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 422: March 26, 1691.

[393] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 6.

[394] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 135ᵛ: Aug. 9. 1671.

[395] Than William Neile, the mathematician.

[396] Ibid., a little later in the volume.

[397] MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 128, a letter from Aubrey to Anthony Wood
dated Nov. 17, 1670.

[398] Ibid., fol. 129.

[399] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 2.

[400] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 49, fol. 67.

[401] Dupl. with 'printed.'

[402] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 32ᵛ.

[403] i.e. the name 'Guiana.'

[404] John Vaughan, son of Richard, second earl of Carberry; succeeded
as 3rd earl in 1687; governor of Jamaica.

[405] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6.

[406] He is not found in the matriculations.

[407] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 32ᵛ.

[408] Sir Francis North, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, 1675.

[409] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 79ᵛ

[410] 'Ermine, a cross engrailed gules.'

[411] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 80.

[412] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 26. Referred to in MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 6:--'see
concerning attorney Noy, in part the 3ᵈ.'

[413] Story left untold.

[414] Vol. i. p. 138.

[415] Thomas Howard, created Earl of Suffolk 1603; Lord High Treasurer
1614-1618; died 1626.

[416] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 181; Aug. 12, 1672.

[417] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 46.

[418] Aubrey gives there the horoscope on this scheme.

[419] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 44. In MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 19ᵛ, the draft is
'John Ogilby, esq., was borne at ... (quaere J. Gadbury) in Scotland,
November ..., anno Domini 1600.'

[420] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 45.

[421] The writing is partly illegible, from blots.

[422] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 46.

[423] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 20.

[424] This sentence is scored out.

[425] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 44.

[426] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 44. The first draft is in MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 20.

[427] 'He was apprentice to John Draper, a dancing-master.'--MS. Aubr.
8, fol. 45.

[428] 'quaere the D<uke of> B<uckingham'>s maske'--MS. Aubr. 8, fol.
45. 'Quaere nomen and time--vide B. Jonson.'--MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 20.

[429] 'taught him his use of pike and musket.'--MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 20.

[430] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 45.

[431] '1627' was written but scored out.

[432] This was in 1633.

[433] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 44.

[434] 'had a' subst. for 'was by.' 'Master of the Revells' in MS. Aubr.
7, fol. 20.

[435] 'pretty little' in MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 20.

[436] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 45.

[437] 'Quaere his _Description of a trooper_ in English verse; very
good.--MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 45ᵛ.

[438] Subst. for 'was of the Lieutenant's troupes.'

[439] Subst. for 'Mr. Chantrel, of Grayes Inne, was his <i.e. the Lord
Lieutenant's> secretary.'

[440] MS. Aubr, 8, fol. 45ᵛ.

[441] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 44ᵛ.

[442] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 47ᵛ.

[443] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 44.

[444] David Whitford, son of Walter Whitford, bishop of Brechin
(1634-1638).

[445] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 44ᵛ.

[446] 'being ruind and spoyled and a cowhouse made of the stage.'--MS.
Aubr. 7, fol. 20ᵛ.

[447] 'which he did after the fire (part of it) at Kingston upon Thames
at Mr. le Wright's house.'--MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 20ᵛ.

[448] Dupl. with 'ingenie.'

[449] Dupl. with 'glorie.'

[450] Anthony Wood notes: 'cosmographer.'

[451] The draft in MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 20ᵛ, gives the date '1672.'

[452] MS. Aubr. 7. fol. 19ᵛ.

[453] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 8.

[454] i.e. Aubrey's pocket Almanac, with his diary notes.

[455] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 47. The leaf is endorsed: 'for my worthy friend
Mr. Morgan,' who has added the note, 'from my worthy friend Mr. Aubrey,
for Mr. Ogilby's life.'

[456] Henry Herbert succeeded as second earl, 1569; died 1601.

[457] Subst. for '100.'

[458] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 45.

[459] '112' is scored out.

[460] Subst. for 'luck.'

[461] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 115.

[462] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 93.

[463] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 39.

[464] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 10.

[465] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 8.

[466] MS. Aubr. 7, a slip at fol. 8ᵛ.

[467] This heading is added by Aubrey in red ink: the rest of the note,
here enclosed in square brackets, is in Uniades' hand.

[468] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 39.

[469] Dupl. with 'worth.'

[470] Subst. for 'make any great scholars.'

[471] Dupl. with 'witt.'

[472] Dupl. with 'be acquainted.'

[473] 'red russet' subst. for 'red.'

[474] 'and laughing' followed: scored out.

[475] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 39ᵛ.

[476] Probably Thomas Henshawe, _supra_.

[477] Subst. for 'part.'

[478] Dupl. with 'they.'

[479] Aubrey draws attention to this by writing 'A chymist' in the
margin.

[480] i.e. simmering.

[481] Dupl. with 'acquainted.'

[482] i.e. the Latin grammar, with Oughtred's modifications.

[483] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 42.

[484] 'Thomas' subst. for 'William.'

[485] Dupl. with 'friend.'

[486] 'country' in Aubrey is generally = 'county.'

[487] Subst. for 'writt.'

[488] Subst. for 'Thus may a joyner or bold carpenter.'

[489] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 42ᵛ.

[490] Subst. for 'trueth.'

[491] 'William' in MS., scored out.

[492] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 40. The letter is in Oughtred's beautiful hand:
the address is on fol. 41ᵛ.

[493] Robert Wood, Fellow of Lincoln: see _supra_, i. p. 295.

[494] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 51. Anthony Wood notes: 'vide _Westminster
monuments_.'

[495] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 93.

[496] Subst. for 'in some of our common-prayer bookes.'

[497] Subst. for 'pictures.'

[498] i.e. limner.

[499] Samuel Cooper, Aubrey's friend, was Hoskins' nephew.

[500] Two lines are suppressed.

[501] i.e. in the library of Ralph Sheldon at Weston: see Clark's
Wood's _Life and Times_, iii. 102, 103, iv. 292.

[502] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 93ᵛ.

[503] Subst. for 'sighing for his love in vaine.'

[504] Here followed 'were': scored out.

[505] Dupl. with 'breasted.'

[506] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 94.

[507] Dupl. with 'lightest.'

[508] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 90ᵛ. Aubrey gives in trick the coat:--'sable, 3
mullets between two bendlets argent [Overbury].'

[509] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 77.

[510] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 98.

[511] Subst. for 'Fulham.'

[512] Given here, with the positions of the planets, etc.; also in MS.
Aubr. 23, fol. 88.

[513] Subst. for 'bred.'

[514] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 72. Aubrey given in trick the coat: '..., a
bend between 2 mullets pierced sable.'

[515] Subst. for 'In those dayes they did alwayes, before the
inventorie of employments for trafique in merchandise, write in above
thus:--'

[516] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 39.

[517] A word is blotted out.

[518] Changed by Pell to 1610 from Aubrey's 1611.

[519] Subst. for 'you.'

[520] Subst. by Pell for 'He was never fellow or scholar at Trin. Coll.'

[521] Aubrey notes: 'This is Dr. Pell's owne hand-writing.'

[522] Subst for 'understands,' to make the sentence agree with Pell's
insertion.

[523] i.e. Son, Daughter, etc.

[524] Subst. for 'speech.'

[525] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 53ᵛ.

[526] Subst. for 'returned, in ...,'

[527] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 52ᵛ.

[528] Subst. by Pell for 'gave him.'

[529] i.e. ague-ish.

[530] Sheldon was 'confirmed' archbishop Aug. 31, 1663; but Aubrey
perhaps meant the date to be that of Pell's appointment as chaplain.

[531] The words in brackets are scored out.

[532] D.D. (Lambeth), Oct. 7, 1663.

[533] Subst. for 'of.'

[534] William, (third) lord Brereton.

[535] Blank in MS., for the number of years.

[536] i.e. lord Brereton.

[537] Blank in MS.; Aubrey generally says whether chancel, aisle, etc.,
and did not know in this case.

[538] 'buried at St. Martin's-in-the-fields,' interlinear note.

[539] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 55.

[540] In MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 8, Aubrey thinks of further inquiry under
this head:--'J. Pell--quaere Catalogum librorum.'

[541] This entry is scored out, perhaps only as out of chronological
order.

[542] The words 'of Mathematicks' are added by Anthony Wood.

[543] i.e. fol. 52; see page 122, _supra_. The note is added by Wood.

[544] Wood notes: 'demonstrated the 10ᵗʰ book of Euclid.'

[545] Wood scores out the word and substitutes 'demonstrated.'

[546] Wood adds: 'his Arithmetic, more than was done before by ..., a
Frenchman.' This was perhaps a bit of information made orally to Wood,
whose deafness prevented his catching the name. In the _Fasti_ he says,
'a certain Frenchman.'

[547] Wood adds: 'in Cheshire.'

[548] Wood writes 'MS.' over, as an improvement.

[549] Wood writes 'demonstrated' over.

[550] Dupl. with 'veine.'

[551] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 52ᵛ.

[552] Subst. for 'Newgate prison.'

[553] Subst. for 'August the last.'

[554] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 55.

[555] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 51ᵛ. The following notes were written by Aubrey
after Pell's death, and are therefore (like the quotation from Horace,
_infra_, p. 131, added at the same time) franker than the pages which
were written to be submitted to Pell's revision.

[556] Cp. the word 'kill-bishop' applied to Chester; Clark's Wood's
_Life and Times_, ii. 253.

[557] Subst. for 'layd his body.'

[558] i.e. in St. Giles-in-the-fields Church.

[559] Subst. for 'value.' The fee charged for a burial in this vault
was £10.

[560] 'or Jersey' followed, but was scored out.

[561] Subst. for 'my.'

[562] Haake's paper came afterwards, and is now fol. 53 of MS. Aubr. 6.
It is printed _infra_.

[563] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 54.

[564] See Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iii. 95.

[565] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 53. The heading is by Aubrey; what follows is
Haak's writing.

[566] John Williams, Lord Keeper 1621-1625.

[567] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 53ᵛ.

[568] The change of construction is as in the MS.

[569] Aubrey notes: 'Mr. Theodor Haak.'

[570] Aubrey notes: 'Mr. secretary Thurlo.' John Thurloe, Secretary of
State 1653-60.

[571] Aubrey notes: 'English.'

[572] Note added by Aubrey at the end of Haak's letter.

[573] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 20.

[574] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 90ᵛ.

[575] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 34.

[576] The words in square brackets are a note in the top margin,
replacing '... admiral and ...,' in the text.

[577] D. Y. in a monogram: i.e. Duke of York.

[578] 'Commanded by Opdam' followed: scored out.

[579] 'Or 17' followed: scored out. Oct. 14, 1644, was a Monday.

[580] Dupl. with 'sensible under tender rebukes.'

[581] '(Wept much)' followed: scored out, and expanded in the next
sentence.

[582] Subst. for 'society.'

[583] ', of reproach' followed: scored out.

[584] In MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6ᵛ, Aubrey notes: 'Call on B. Clarke,
Quaker, for a catalogue of Mr. Penn's writings.'

[585] i.e. Negative; the answer is 'no.'

[586] Subst. for 'sometimes.'

[587] D. Y. in a monogram: i.e. Duke of York.

[588] 'Sometimes' followed: scored out.

[589] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 34ᵛ.

[590] Pennsylvania.

[591] Edmund Wyld.

[592] The note requires expansion in this way. It is preceded by
'Carolina,' scored out.

[593] Subst. for 'perfectly.'

[594] i.e. declaims.

[595] Dupl. with 'with fluent copie of words.' 'Copie' is _copia_
Englished.

[596] 'November 1681' followed: scored out.

[597] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 35.

[598] Anthony Wood notes: 'beginning: I say,' i.e. in the _Athenae
Oxonienses_.

[599] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 35ᵛ.

[600] Subst. for 'plaine.'

[601] 'which are' followed: scored out.

[602] 'of being' followed: scored out.

[603] This is Aubrey's symbol for 'fortune.'

[604] Added by Anthony Wood.

[605] This pedigree is in MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 35ᵛ. Aubrey notes in the
margin: 'Pen's-lodge in Bradon forest.' On fol. 34ᵛ Aubrey has in trick
the coat: 'argent, on a fess sable, three besants, a crescent for
difference; impaling ...' with the note 'Sir ... Pen of Pen in Bucks,
tempore Edw. III or Hen. III, quaere.' He adds: 'vide lib. A' (his own
Wiltshire collections): see Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iv. 192.

[606] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 36; not in Aubrey's hand, and perhaps supplied
him by Benjamin Clark the bookseller (_supra_, p. 133). Anthony Wood
notes (scored out): 'This is but a very imperfect catalogue,' and
'quaere Silas Norton the quaker.' For Silas Norton, see Clark's Wood's
_Life and Times_, iii. 279.

[607] Wood notes: 'Catalogue 2. 16, 1': see Wood's _Life and Times_,
iv. 235.

[608] Wood notes 'habeo'; he had this book in his library.

[609] Wood notes: 'Sam. Starling, Lord Mayor' (of London, 1670).

[610] Wood notes 'Cat. 2. 270.'

[611] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 12: a fragmentary jotting about the severity of
the penal laws. 'Mr. Anderson' occurs as an informant on Irish matters
in the life of Richard Boyle, earl of Cork, vol. i. pp. 115, 116.

[612] Given in colours by Aubrey.

[613] He married Elizabeth Waller.

[614] i.e. Aubrey had been misinformed by Lady Petty.

[615] I omit the technical figure.

[616] In MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 11ᵛ, is an 'astrological judgment' on
Petty's nativity made by Charles Snell, July 10, 1676.

[617] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 13.

[618] The words in square brackets are a pencil note in the margin.

[619] Subst. for 'Sir William.'

[620] i.e. of his nativity: _supra_.

[621] Subst. for 'I have been enformed that about this time.'

[622] Subst. for 'France.'

[623] Aubrey adds the interpretation of this word--

'To begin to play the merchant.'

[624] 'I guesse' subst. for 'no doubt.'

[625] 'taught' subst. for 'read and taught.'

[626] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 13ᵛ.

[627] Dupl. with 'sowsed.'

[628] Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, i. 165.

[629] Subst. for 'gent.'

[630] i.e. fol. 14.

[631] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 14.

[632] See vol. i. p. 367, note (e).

[633] i.e. fol. 14.

[634] Subst. for 'to restore to the former owners, being then.'

[635] _Supra_, p. 139.

[636] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 14ᵛ.

[637] Subst. for 'appoint.'

[638] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 13ᵛ.

[639] This sentence is a later addition.

[640] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 14.

[641] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 14ᵛ.

[642] Subst. for 'into.'

[643] This sentence has been scored out.

[644] 'been' followed: scored out.

[645] Dupl. with 'felt.'

[646] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 15.

[647] In 1631.

[648] Anthony Wood notes:--'See another title in B. 19; G. 28, p. 5,'
collections of Wood's own: Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iv. 232.

[649] Written at first '... with Sir ... in 8vo': and then a line drawn
to bring in this fuller title from the opposite page.

[650] Note by Anthony Wood: erased.

[651] Note by Anthony Wood: erased.

[652] _Supra_, vol. i. p. 272.

[653] Anthony Wood adds the reference 'G. 28, p. 6.'

[654] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 15ᵛ.

[655] Written at first 'to the church'; Anthony Wood queried in the
margin 'what church'; and then Aubrey inserted the name.

[656] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 11ᵛ.

[657] Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, i. 165.

[658] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 12.

[659] i.e. the Picture Gallery at the Bodleian.

[660] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 11ᵛ.

[661] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 12.

[662] MS. Aubr. 23, a slip at fol. 11ᵛ.

[663] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 8.

[664] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 8.

[665] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 12ᵛ.

[666] MS. Aubr. 21, p. 11.

[667] Perhaps wife of Major John Graunt.

[668] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 103ᵛ.

[669] Aubrey, in MS. Wood F. 49, fol. 127.

[670] Aubrey, in MS. Wood F. 49, fol. 33, 34: March 11, 1690/1.

[671] Prov. xxxi. 31.

[672] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 414ᵛ: Feb. 1, 1690/1.

[673] MS. Aubr. 21, p. 3, and p. 23ᵛ. Thomas Flatman is said by Anthony
Wood to have had the chief hand in these books.

[674] Montelion's Almanac, 1660 (by Philips), 1661, 1662 (both by
Flatman).

[675] 1661: a satire on major-general John Lambert (? by Flatman).

[676] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 38.

[677] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 40, is a fair copy of part of this paragraph in
Dr. Philip Bliss' hand, probably as a guide to his copyist.

[678] The paragraph following is the certificate from the parish
register of baptisms.

[679] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 38ᵛ.

[680] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 38.

[681] In 1632, in its 15th edition.

[682] _Sic._ = 'Her school-friends were.'

[683] Dupl. with 'little.'

[684] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 38ᵛ.

[685] Sister of Sir John Aubrey.

[686] Philip Skippon.

[687] Information given by some one to Aubrey, who notes an ambiguity
in it.

[688] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 92ᵛ.

[689] Aubrey, in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 380: Sept. 25, 1686.

[690] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 97ᵛ.

[691] Dupl. with 'minister.'

[692] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 9ᵛ.

[693] Trinity College, Oxford.

[694] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 15.

[695] In MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 12ᵛ, Aubrey has a note:--'Sir William
Playters was of Suffolke.'

[696] Two lines of text are here suppressed.

[697] A line of text is suppressed.

[698] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 16.

[699] Meaning, I suppose, that this date is carved on the east side of
the same monument.

[700] MS. Aubr. 26, fol. 23.

[701] MS. Ballard 14, fol. 108, a letter from Aubrey to Anthony Wood,
dated Aug. 18, 1674.

[702] Ralph Bathurst, President of Trinity, had become dean of Wells in
1670, and was now Vice-Chancellor of Oxford. Wood had accused him of
growing arrogant in his office.

[703] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 89ᵛ.

[704] Sir ... Dayrell.

[705] 'lived' subst. for 'was.'

[706] John Popham, son of Sir Francis.

[707] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 90.

[708] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 10.

[709] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 9ᵛ.

[710] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 60.

[711] Richard Potter, Scholar of Trin. Coll. Oxon., B.D. 1587,
prebendary of Worcester 1598-1628.

[712] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5.

[713] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 63.

[714] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 8ᵛ.

[715] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 60.

[716] The words in square brackets are added by another hand, possibly
Potter's own.

[717] Dupl. with 'find-out.'

[718] Dupl. with 'person's.'

[719] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 60ᵛ.

[720] i.e. MS. Aubr. 7; see p. 161.

[721] Subst. for 'Bible.'

[722] Subst. for 'printed.'

[723] Explicit MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 60ᵛ; incipit fol. 63.

[724] Dupl. with 'unf<urnished>.'

[725] 'beame' written over 'saile' as a correction.

[726] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 63ᵛ.

[727] Subst. for 'but his'.

[728] Anthony Wood supplies the name.

[729] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 61. The letter is Potter's autograph. On this
page is written by another hand (not Potter's)--'Hanc designationem
Dr. Harveus frivolam et impossibilem omnino esse asseruit: sed tamen
quaere. Consult Dr. Glisson': à propos of what?

[730] Subst. for 'an hen's craw.'

[731] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 63ᵛ.

[732] Dupl. with 'coasin.'

[733] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 118.

[734] It was May 26; so the date of birth must be, Sat. May 18,
_Whitsunday_ eve.

[735] MS. Aubr. 3, fol. 18ᵛ.

[736] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 11.

[737] See the reference, _supra_.

[738] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 91ᵛ.

[739] i.e. completed and published V. Powell's 'collection of
prophecies,' at the end of the Concordance.

[740] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5ᵛ.

[741] Of B. N. C., where he matriculated in 1604/5.

[742] i.e. MS. Aubr. 8, _ut infra_.

[743] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 398: Aug. 4, 1687.

[744] In 1643.

[745] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 96ᵛ.

[746] Subst. for 'about the time of.'

[747] 'A vindication of the monarchy ...' Lond. 1661.

[748] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 85ᵛ.

[749] Subst. for 'thinkes.'

[750] Changed by Anthony Wood to 'Swanswyck.'

[751] At Bath.

[752] _Rectius_ Mount Orgeuil in Jersey.

[753] See p. 54.

[754] ? Christopher Wren.

[755] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 7.

[756] MS. Ballard 14, fol. 103: a letter from Aubrey to Anthony Wood,
of date July 2, 1674. In MS. Ballard 14, fol. 96, a letter to Wood of
date Oct. 28, 1673, Aubrey says: 'I mett on Sunday was sennight at Mr.
Ashmoll's one Captain Pugh, a rubro-literate gent.'

[757] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 321: April 12, 1679.

[758] Ibid., fol. 316: April 9, 1679.

[759] Dupl. with 'vitia.'

[760] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 15ᵛ.

[761] MS. Ballard 14, fol. 96; a letter from Aubrey to Anthony Wood, of
date Oct. 28, 1673.

[762] See i. p. 280, _supra_.

[763] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 46ᵛ.

[764] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75.

[765] Given by Aubrey in colours.

[766] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 74ᵛ.

[767] i.e. fol. 75 of MS. Aubr. 6.

[768] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75.

[769] For the eldest son, see _infra_, p. 194.

[770] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 7. On the same page is another draft of this
note:--'Quaere his skull of Sir John Ellowys, who maried his sonne
Carew Ralegh's daughter and heire.'

[771] See _infra_, p. 189.

[772] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 9ᵛ.

[773] A note intended for Anthony Wood, in answer to two of his
queries: see Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iii. 295.

[774] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75.

[775] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75ᵛ.

[776] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77.

[777] i.e. he was an undergraduate at Oxford, and so in straits.

[778] MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 135, a letter from Aubrey to Wood, of date
Aug. 9, 1671.

[779] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75ᵛ.

[780] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 76ᵛ.

[781] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77.

[782] Subst. for 'boy.'

[783] Subst. for 'dish.'

[784] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77ᵛ.

[785] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75ᵛ.

[786] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77ᵛ.

[787] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 8; notes dated 'London, March 12, 1688/9.'

[788] Subst. for 'clerk.'

[789] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75.

[790] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75ᵛ.

[791] Raw.

[792] Lie (in the then ordinary spelling, 'lye').

[793] Rawlye, a common spelling of the name.

[794] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77ᵛ.

[795] _Supra_, p. 179.

[796] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75ᵛ.

[797] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75.

[798] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 76.

[799] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75ᵛ.

[800] Subst. for 'a mighty high.'

[801] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 7.

[802] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 74ᵛ.

[803] Dupl. with 'engaging in quarrells.'

[804] Aubrey has forgotten the exact word Ruddyer used.

[805] Four lines of text are here suppressed.

[806] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77.

[807] Eight lines of text are here suppressed.

[808] In MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 1ᵛ, Aubrey cites for approval:--'"Poets and
bravo's have punkes to their mothers"--from D. Long.' 'Dol. Long (now
lady Heron)' born July 3, 1643, is mentioned MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 68. See
also Dorothy, lady Long, _supra_, p. 36.

[809] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 78ᵛ.

[810] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 76.

[811] Subst. for 'things.'

[812] Dupl. with 'staffe.'

[813] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 76ᵛ.

[814] Dupl. with 'traine.'

[815] Dupl. with 'duty' or 'respect.'

[816] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 79.

[817] Aubrey seems to have doubted what was the official title: Sir
Walte Raleigh was Governor of Jersey, 1601.

[818] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 76ᵛ.

[819] Subst. for 'of Garnesey (or Jersey, I have forgot).'

[820] Subst. for 'till.'

[821] i.e. Capt. Roger North.

[822] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 7.

[823] i.e. fol. 32ᵛ of MS. Aubr. 8, as printed _supra_, p. 95.

[824] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77.

[825] Dupl. with 'boate.'

[826] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77ᵛ.

[827] Subst. for 'my lord.' John Scudamore, created viscount Scudamore
in the peerage of Ireland 1628, obiit 1671.

[828] Subst. for 'sawe him beheaded.'

[829] Dupl. with 'might avocate.'

[830] Dupl. with 'vertebra.'

[831] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 78.

[832] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 79.

[833] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77.

[834] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77ᵛ.

[835] Job xxx. 31.

[836] 'Cantus' subst. for 'vox.' The Vulgate has 'organum meum.'

[837] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 79.

[838] MS. Aubr. 9, fol. 7.

[839] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77ᵛ.

[840] Subst. for 'much.'

[841] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 79.

[842] Subst. for 'his (I thinke a MS.) ... _of metalls and oare_.'

[843] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 7.

[844] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 77ᵛ.

[845] Edward de Vere, 17th earl.

[846] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 75.

[847] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 223ᵛ: Sept. 16, 1673.

[848] Ibid., fol. 166: Feb. 12, 1671/2.

[849] Ibid., fol. 308: June 6, 1678.

[850] Carew Raleigh, on January 1, 1666/7.

[851] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 354ᵛ: June 21, 1681.

[852] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 206ᵛ: May 14, 1673.

[853] i.e. Aubrey's estate, in that county: sold _circiter_ 1662.

[854] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 74ᵛ.

[855] See _supra_ i. p. 122.

[856] Walter, eldest son of Sir Walter Raleigh, matric. at Corpus in
1607.

[857] 'Coursing' in the Oxford Schools frequently ended in blows
between individuals, and fights between Colleges: see Clark's Wood's
_Life and Times_, ii. 75.

[858] Subst. for 'wiped.'

[859] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 387: June 29, 1689.

[860] Philippa, widow of Sir Anthony Ashley.

[861] On June 15, 1660.

[862] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5.

[863] In Jan. 1680/1: Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, ii. 513.

[864] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 114.

[865] Aubrey, in these notices, frequently marks the University of the
man whose life he is writing, in a prominent manner, for the benefit of
Anthony Wood, at whose instance they were written.

[866] Given on fol. 113ᵛ of MS. Aubr. 6, as on '15 Junii 1605, the moon
past the first quarter.'

[867] Aubrey plumed himself on being fairly tall: for his height, see
p. 67.

[868] i.e. see more about this in a letter in the hands of Anthony
Wood; see _infra_, p. 198.

[869] ... Stafford, of Blatherwicke, Northants.

[870] So Aubrey writes it.

[871] The passage in square brackets is on fol. 113ᵛ of MS. Aubr. 6,
being a note added later by Aubrey. Aubrey notes on fol. 114--'quaere
Dr. Pell <for> the prebendary's name'; and the same query is on fol. 7
of MS. Aubr. 9.

[872] Subst. for 'care.'

[873] See note [b], _supra_.

[874] Subst. for 'who.'

[875] Subst. for 'words.'

[876] Subst. for ''tis rare to find.'

[877] These two lines stood at first:--

    Short-hand he wrote well and could measure land
    As now he doeth the ground whereon you stand.

[878] Subst. for 'could measure.'

[879] Anthony Wood fills up this name, as Peter 'Hausted.'

[880] Wood notes 'Hertfordshire, quaere.'

[881] MS. Aubr. 21, p. 11.

[882] Eleanor, widow of Sir Henry Lee, married (1634) Edward Ratcliffe,
6th earl of Sussex (who died 1643).

[883] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 71ᵛ.

[884] Anthony Wood's, 1674.

[885] Record was fellow of All Souls in 1531.

[886] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 72.

[887] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 8ᵛ.

[888] Aubrey jotted down queries in this way in his MS., to meet the
eye of Anthony Wood, to whom it was to be sent.

[889] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 11.

[890] Dupl. with 'sayes.'

[891] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 9ᵛ.

[892] Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iii. 252, 294, 295.

[893] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 6.

[894] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 10ᵛ.

[895] Dupl. with 'Lyte.'

[896] So Aubrey writes ἀνώνυμος.

[897] Dupl. with 'thoroughly.'

[898] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 55ᵛ.

[899] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 42ᵛ.

[900] The note follows that about Inglebert, _supra_, p. 1.

[901] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 49, fol. 42ᵛ. On fol. 41 Aubrey gives long
extracts from the 'preface of Judge Hales, though his name is not to
it: but it is knowne to be his,' to 'Un abridgment de plusieurs
cases ... per Henry Rolle,' London, 1668, folio.

[902] Dupl. with 'a clearer elucidation.'

[903] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 6ᵛ.

[904] Anthony Wood notes in the margin, 'This is in Mr. Edward
Sherburne's edition of Manilius'; and on the inserted slip (fol. 7),
''Tis this that is in Sherburne.'

[905] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 7.

[906] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 94ᵛ. Anthony Wood has a note in pencil: 'Vide
latter end of Catalogue 4,' i.e. Wood MS. O.C. 8533, now in Wood MS. E.
2.

[907] Dupl. with 'putt.'

[908] MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 383: written by Rushworth's servant from his
dictation, to be transmitted by Aubrey to Anthony Wood.

[909] Wood notes:--'near Berwick, quaere.'

[910] MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 383ᵛ.

[911] Wood wrongly suggests 'Newbury.'

[912] MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 384.

[913] This is Rushworth's autograph.

[914] Wood notes here:--'a prisoner in the king's bench in Southwarke,
where he hath been at least 3 or 4 yeares.'

[915] Added by Aubrey July 28, 1687, at the end of Rushworth's
statement.

[916] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 386ᵛ: June 29, 1689.

[917] Ibid., fol. 405: July 5, 1690. The same note is found also in MS.
Aubr. 21, fol. 78.

[918] In MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5, Aubrey had noted: 'Mr. ... Rushworth
obiit London 1684, quaere.'

[919] MS. Aubr. 6, fol 100ᵛ.

[920] A slip for grandson. Robert, son of Thomas, first earl, succeeded
in 1608 and died 1609.

[921] Margaret Sackville, daughter of this Richard, 3rd earl of Dorset,
married John Tufton, 2nd earl of Thanet.

[922] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 20ᵛ

[923] Subst. for 'Cecil, earle of Exeter.'

[924] i.e. fol. 20ᵛ of MS. Aubr. 8, as now foliated.

[925] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 32ᵛ.

[926] Sir Thomas Temple, of Stowe, Bart.

[927] MS. Aubr. 6, fol 88ᵛ.

[928] Subst. for 'that bishop,' i.e. Sanderson.

[929] Aubrey in MS Wood F. 39, fol. 185: Aug. 22, 1672.

[930] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 50.

[931] 'This is printed in _Westminster Monuments_'--marginal note by
Anthony Wood.

[932] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 9.

[933] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 84.

[934] Subst. for 'been one of his Professors.'

[935] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 84ᵛ.

[936] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 104ᵛ. Aubrey gives in trick the coat:--'or, on
a saltire sable 5 roses of the field.' Cooper, _Athenae Cantab._, i.
514, gives a very different coat to bishop Scory.

[937] Dupl. with 'or an angell.'

[938] Dupl. with 'favour.'

[939] Subst. for 'gave.'

[940] Dupl. with 'very fairly.'

[941] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 83ᵛ.

[942] This notice of Securis is written at the foot of the leaf which
has the notice of Thomas Muffet, _supra_, p. 89.

[943] Here followed 'and dedicated to ... then Lord Chancellor of
England.' Aubrey scored this out, on finding that the Almanac for 1582
so dedicated was by Evans Lloyd, _supra_, p. 35.

[944] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 208: May 17, 1673.

[945] The stone-cutter; often cited by Aubrey for inscriptions.

[946] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5.

[947] Dupl. with 'write.'

[948] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 120. Dr. Philip Bliss has added a reference to
'Part iii, p. 17b,' i.e. to MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 81ᵛ.

[949] Four lines of text are suppressed in this paragraph.

[950] 'daughter' written over 'child,' as a correction.

[951] Subst. for 'brought.'

[952] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 120ᵛ.

[953] Dupl. with 'throw.'

[954] Subst. for 'were.'

[955] Subst. for 'alter.'

[956] Subst. for 'were in.'

[957] Given by Aubrey in trick.

[958] Subst. for 'decent.'

[959] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 121.

[960] Dupl. with 'confute.'

[961] The earl of Kent's or Shrewsbury's.

[962] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 81ᵛ.

[963] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 109. Aubrey draws, in the margin, a wreath of
laurel.

[964] See vol. i. p. 97.

[965] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 80.

[966] To Catherine, queen of Charles II.

[967] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 73ᵛ.

[968] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 9.

[969] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 91ᵛ.

[970] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 91.

[971] MS. Aubr. 23, notes on foll. 32ᵛ-36.

[972] April 15, 1649, was a Sunday.

[973] April 14, 1648, was a Friday.

[974] Lues Venerea: fol. 31.

[975] Aubrey to Wood in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 387: June 29, 1689.

[976] In Feb. 1687/8: Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iii. 251.

[977] See p. 178.

[978] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 42ᵛ.

[979] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 17. Aubrey gives the arms:--'parted per fess
or and gules, in chief 2 "pidgeons"; impaling, azure, a chevron ermine
between 3 mullets or.'

[980] Anthony Wood notes in the margin: 'This is printed in Stowe's
_Survey_, edit. 1633, fol....'

[981] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 85.

[982] Lond. 1617.

[983] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 89.

[984] ? Sir Peter Ball, recorder of Exeter.

[985] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 89ᵛ.

[986] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 41.

[987] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 83. Anthony Wood adds the reference 'Edmund
Spencer, vide pag. 53 b,' i.e. fol. 82ᵛ of MS. Aubr. 6, in the life of
Sir Philip Sydney.

[988] Subst. for 'made.'

[989] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5ᵛ.

[990] i.e. Samuel Fell, dean of Ch. Ch. 1638.

[991] i.e. more than thirty.

[992] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 6.

[993] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 97.

[994] Subst. for 'barrister.'

[995] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 84ᵛ.

[996] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 88ᵛ.

[997] Subst. for 'Henfold.'

[998] Subst. for 'remaines.'

[999] Written 'Henry': but corrected by Anthony Wood.

[1000] i.e. the Picture Gallery at the Bodleian.

[1001] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 273ᵛ: May 30, 1674.

[1002] Thomas Stephens matric. at Pembroke in 1637, and took a degree
in Arts in 1642.

[1003] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 18.

[1004] Anthony Wood notes: 'Vide among Windsore epitaphs.'

[1005] i.e. in the life of W. Oughtred, _supra_, p. 108.

[1006] i.e. Aubrey's Perambulation of Surrey (MS. Aubr. 4).

[1007] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 90ᵛ.

[1008] i.e. in his monument.

[1009] i.e. farther ('plus').

[1010] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 1ᵛ.

[1011] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 88.

[1012] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 88ᵛ.

[1013] Dupl. with 'can be.'

[1014] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 88.

[1015] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 88ᵛ.

[1016] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 91.

[1017] Second son to James Stuart, husband of Elizabeth, countess of
Moray; K.B. June 2, 1610.

[1018] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 23.

[1019] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 110.

[1020] Controller of the Household to James I, 1621; Cofferer of the
Household to Charles I, 1628.

[1021] 'look't' is written over '...,' as the English for the French
word which Aubrey had forgot.

[1022] Substituted for 'Sir John Digby.'

[1023] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 110ᵛ.

[1024] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 109ᵛ. Aubrey heads the leaf: 'More of Sir John
Suckling.'

[1025] Dupl. with 'paper.'

[1026] Subst. for 'come.'

[1027] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 10ᵛ.

[1028] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 59ᵛ.

[1029] The Charterhouse.

[1030] Subst. for 'Newcastle.'

[1031] Aubrey omits to say that Sutton married this rich widow.

[1032] The estate.

[1033] i.e. made presents to him.

[1034] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 27.

[1035] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 41ᵛ.

[1036] The astrological details here given are omitted.

[1037] The same note is given in MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 121, out of Dr.
Richard Napier's papers in Ashmole's hands.

[1038] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 82.

[1039] The words 'anciently a pleasant monasterie' followed: scored
out, because repeated below.

[1040] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 82ᵛ.

[1041] Anthony Wood notes:--'Edmund Spenser; quaere whether this be
true?'

[1042] Subst. for 'brought.'

[1043] 'young gentleman' subst. for 'cavalier.'

[1044] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 83.

[1045] Dupl. with 'tender.'

[1046] Subst. for 'neer upon.'

[1047] This pedigree is in MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 83.

[1048] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 81 B.

[1049] Dorothy, younger daughter of Walter Devereux, earl of Essex,
married (2ndly) Henry Percy, ninth earl of Northumberland.

[1050] Penelope, elder daughter of Walter Devereux, earl of Essex, m.
Robert Rich, third baron Rich.

[1051] Lettice, daughter of Sir Francis Knolles, married (1st) Walter
Devereux, created earl of Essex in 1572; (2nd) Robert Dudley, earl of
Leicester, brother of Sir Philip Sydney's mother.

[1052] The place is inserted by Aubrey.

[1053] Letter torn.

[1054] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 58.

[1055] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 121.

[1056] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 82.

[1057] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 114ᵛ.

[1058] 'his brother' underlined with pencil, as doubtful: Anthony Wood,
in the _Athenae_, styles him nephew.

[1059] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 116.

[1060] Over against the house which in 1680 was called the Goat.

[1061] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 8.

[1062] MS. Aubr. 21, fol. 77.

[1063] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 7ᵛ.

[1064] i.e. Birch.

[1065] i.e. Joseph Crowther, Reg. Prof. Greek, Oxon., a prebendary of
Worcester.

[1066] Of Harwich.

[1067] The Cavaliers and Churchmen were now looking out for 'God's
judgements' on the buyers of Church land, as the Puritans before them
had looked out for judgements on Sabbath-breakers, play-actors, &c.
(see Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, i. 49, 322).

[1068] Dupl. with 'a K----.' ? a knave.

[1069] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 8.

[1070] i.e. Taylor's Herefordshire collections.

[1071] Taylor's autograph, Nov. 30, 1673, sent to Aubrey for A. Wood:
MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 237.

[1072] Taylor to Aubrey, 'Harwich, 18 Nov. 1673': ibid., fol. 236.

[1073] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 50ᵛ.

[1074] Installed Sept. 5, 1661.

[1075] Anthony Wood notes here:--'quaere in Thomas Hariot.'

[1076] Isaac Barrow, bishop of St. Asaph; see Clark's Wood's _Life and
Times_, ii. 489.

[1077] 'Barrow': Aubrey's marginal note.

[1078] 'He is interred in the church-yard at the west end of the church
there: June 30, 1680': Aubrey's marginal note.

[1079] Subst. for 'qui intratis domum.'

[1080] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 79ᵛ.

[1081] Dupl. with 'sect.'

[1082] Subst. for 'Leominster.'

[1083] i.e. Dromore.

[1084] Dupl. with 'frequent.'

[1085] Dupl. with 'owe.'

[1086] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 13.

[1087] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 13ᵛ.

[1088] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 49ᵛ.

[1089] Subst. for 'minister.'

[1090] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 8.

[1091] Thomas Colepeper, 2nd baron, appointed governor of Virginia in
1675, but went not out till 1680, returning in 1682.

[1092] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 10ᵛ.

[1093] Subst. for 'inventor.'

[1094] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 8ᵛ.

[1095] _sic_ in MS.

[1096] François Viet, mathematician, 1540-1603.

[1097] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 91.

[1098] Joscelyne Percy, 11th earl, died 1670: see Clark's Wood's _Life
and Times_, ii. 193.

[1099] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 51ᵛ.

[1100] Aubrey sketches, as on the top of the monument, a circle with
the coat of arms, 'a doe statant regardant, transfixed at the neck by
an arrow, a chief indented.'

[1101] See in the life of Dr. Gill, _supra_, i. p. 263.

[1102] Subst. for 'during the troubles.'

[1103] These lives being addressed by Aubrey to Anthony Wood.

[1104] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 52.

[1105] William Burt, Anthony Wood's schoolmaster; Clark's Wood's _Life
and Times_, i. 108.

[1106] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 96ᵛ.

[1107] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 59ᵛ.

[1108] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 3.

[1109] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 6.

[1110] i.e. a sword fit only to stick a pig.

[1111] i.e. then.

[1112] See p. 249, _supra_.

[1113] i.e. six, eight, twelve or more.

[1114] Aubrey notes in the margin:--'vide Macchiavelli's _Prince_.'

[1115] Aubrey notes in the margin:--'vide _Oceanam_,' i.e. Harrington's.

[1116] Dupl. with 'bare.'

[1117] The revel Aubrey pictures in his comedy took place on St.
Peter's Day. A collection for the poor was made at the Wake.

[1118] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 25.

[1119] At Sir John Aubrey's.

[1120] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 169: March 14, 1671/2.

[1121] Puisne Justice of Chester, 1622-1636.

[1122] Ibid., fol. 169ᵛ.

[1123] Henry Vaughan's autograph to Aubrey, in Wood MS. F. 39, fol.
216: June 15, 1673.

[1124] Ibid., fol. 216ᵛ.

[1125] Idem, ibid., fol. 227: July 17, 1673.

[1126] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, 219: July 5, 1673.

[1127] Added by Anthony Wood.

[1128] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 389: July 15, 1689.

[1129] Dupl. with 'Florence.'

[1130] Dupl. with 'ashamed.'

[1131] Subst. for 'a beggar.'

[1132] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 121.

[1133] MS. Aubr. 23, a slip at fol. 121ᵛ.

[1134] Mary Villiers, mother of George, first duke of Buckingham,
created countess of Buckingham July 1, 1618.

[1135] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5.

[1136] Second son of George, first duke: killed 1648.

[1137] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 14.

[1138] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 8.

[1139] The University of Oxford offered £3,000 for it, and was refused.
It was soon afterwards sold for that sum to the University of Leyden.

[1140] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 5.

[1141] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 98.

[1142] John Wild, Chief Baron of the Exchequer 1648-1655, 1660
(Jan.-June).

[1143] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 121: Dec. 5, 1668.

[1144] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 11.

[1145] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 79. The horoscope is given.

[1146] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 111.

[1147] Aubrey notes in the margin in pencil 'From Mr. T. B.,' i.e.
Thomas Bigg.

[1148] Subst. for 'before.'

[1149] Anthony Wood objects--'quaere.'

[1150] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 111ᵛ.

[1151] Subst. for '1,500 _li._'

[1152] Subst. for 'still.'

[1153] Subst. for 'is revered' <as having>.

[1154] Dupl. with 'sprang.'

[1155] Explicit fol. 111ᵛ.

[1156] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 113.

[1157] Subst. for 'undertake it, for that it could not be done better.'

[1158] Dupl. with 'lost.'

[1159] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 112.

[1160] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 113.

[1161] Subst. for 'poëtique.'

[1162] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 112ᵛ.

[1163] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 9ᵛ.

[1164] Dupl. with 'scommaticall.'

[1165] Inserted by Anthony Wood.

[1166] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6ᵛ.

[1167] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 94ᵛ.

[1168] Dupl. with 'irreconcileable.'

[1169] Dupl. with 'square.'

[1170] Dupl. with 'might precede.'

[1171] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 95.

[1172] See vol. i. p. 404.

[1173] Dupl. with 'the author.'

[1174] Dupl. with 'been.'

[1175] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 101.

[1176] Subst. for 'Betty.'

[1177] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 86.

[1178] See _infra_, p. 290.

[1179] Dupl. with 'the.'

[1180] Dupl. with 'scholar.' The reference is added 'vide pag. d.',
i.e. fol. 6ᵛ, the life of Laurence Rooke, q.v.

[1181] Subst. for 'upon.'

[1182] Dupl. with 'was sequestred.'

[1183] 'Dr.' is erased: Greaves was M.A. only.

[1184] The passage in brackets was added by Aubrey in the margin. He
ought then to have changed 'Mr. Freeman's' _infra_ to 'lord Wenman's.'

[1185] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 86ᵛ.

[1186] Space left for Hawes' degree, i.e. M.A.

[1187] MS. Aubr. 10, fol. 24ᵛ.

[1188] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 86ᵛ.

[1189] Anthony Wood writes over, for clearness sake, 'Dr. Ward.'

[1190] Dupl. with 'wonne their love.'

[1191] A slip for '_uno ore_.'

[1192] 'Ward' followed: scored out.

[1193] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 87.

[1194] Subst. for 'country.'

[1195] Henry Broome, or Brome, a Londer bookseller: MS. Aubr. 26, fol.
64.

[1196] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 86ᵛ.

[1197] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 87.

[1198] Dupl. with 'continue.'

[1199] A memo. to bring in here an account of the bishop's last illness.

[1200] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 8.

[1201] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 386ᵛ: June 29, 1689.

[1202] Ibid., fol. 387.

[1203] Seth Ward, B.D.

[1204] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 87ᵛ.

[1205] MS. Aubr. 10, fol. 65.

[1206] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 8.

[1207] MS. Aubr. 6, a slip at fol. 86.

[1208] _Supra_, p. 284.

[1209] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 8.

[1210] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 34.

[1211] Subst. for 'servant.'

[1212] Subst for 'printed.'

[1213] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 34ᵛ.

[1214] Anthony Wood marks 'quaere.'

[1215] The Tables of Logarithms.

[1216] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5.

[1217] Dodd's Church History, ii. 380.

[1218] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 135: Aug. 9, 1671.

[1219] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 144.

[1220] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 42ᵛ. Anthony Wood queries:--'Which Dr. Webb do
you meane? whether him that was a bishop in Ireland?'

[1221] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 80ᵛ.

[1222] 'A thick 8vo, printed anno Domini 1635' followed; scored out.

[1223] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 81.

[1224] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 97.

[1225] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 9ᵛ.

[1226] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6ᵛ.

[1227] MS. Aubr. 9, a slip pasted on to fol. 27ᵛ. Also noted by Aubrey
in MS. Ballard 14, fol. 113ᵛ; Nov. 7, 1674.

[1228] In the Trin. Coll. Oxon. register, where he was adm. Scholar May
28, 1635, aet. 16, he is entered as of 'Elvington in Goringe parish,
Oxon.'

[1229] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 6.

[1230] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 234: Nov. 15, 1673.

[1231] Ibid., fol. 282ᵛ: Oct. 24, 1674.

[1232] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 104.

[1233] Which he had given Trenchard as dowry with his daughter.

[1234] i.e. Richard Aubrey, his step-son.

[1235] Dupl. with 'man.'

[1236] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 104ᵛ.

[1237] Subst. for 'stately.'

[1238] Dupl. with 'with a great deale of state.'

[1239] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 2.

[1240] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6ᵛ.

[1241] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 92. Aubrey gives in trick the coat:--'See
of Chester; impaling, argent, on a bend engrailed cottised sable, 3
martlets or, a crescent for difference.'

[1242] Dupl. with 'partes.'

[1243] Dupl. with 'family.'

[1244] Subst. for 'after the peace in Germany was made.'

[1245] In error for Richard Cromwell.

[1246] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 92ᵛ.

[1247] MS. Aubr. 8, fol 16ᵛ.

[1248] Dupl. with 'topique.'

[1249] A plea that the failure of this shorthand to gain credit abroad
is no argument against its excellence.

[1250] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 4ᵛ.

[1251] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 6ᵛ.

[1252] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 16ᵛ.

[1253] i.e. he used to ride over to Abingdon on market-days, in hope of
practice.

[1254] i.e. before he took his Doctor's degree.

[1255] Dupl. with 'in Canterbury College.'

[1256] Sir Walter Smith of Great Bedwin, Wilts.

[1257] Subst. for 'suddenly.'

[1258] Dupl. with 'brindle.'

[1259] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 55ᵛ.

[1260] Dupl. with μετανοεῖτε.

[1261] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 56.

[1262] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 141ᵛ: Oct. 27, 1671.

[1263] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 173: May 25, 1672.

[1264] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 50ᵛ.

[1265] Wood says the Marshalsea.

[1266] MS. Aubr. 8, fol 8.

[1267] i.e. look in Aubrey's diary for 1673 (or about that year, 'plus,
minus') for a note concerning him.

[1268] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 10ᵛ.

[1269] Dupl. with 'rector.'

[1270] i.e. Theophilus.

[1271] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 75ᵛ, 76.

[1272] Sunday.

[1273] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 9.

[1274] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 91.

[1275] The words in square brackets are substituted for 'haz been very
well assured.'

[1276] 'of' <a slip for 'or'> 'Cardinall' followed: struck out.

[1277] MS. Aubr. 6, fol. 91ᵛ.

[1278] See the facsimile at the end of this volume.

[1279] Aubrey in MS. Wood F. 39, fol. 273ᵛ: May 30, 1674.

[1280] Thomas Stephens (q.v.), from whom Aubrey received this
traditional story.

[1281] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 62ᵛ.

[1282] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 53.

[1283] East Knoyle.

[1284] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 8ᵛ.

[1285] i.e. he misses most the meetings of the Society, and would
willingly pay for a regular account of each meeting.

[1286] i.e. Aubrey's initials, J. A., disguised.

[1287] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 82ᵛ.

[1288] 'Edward' subst. for 'Edmund.'

[1289] Subst. for 'called.'

[1290] Sic.

[1291] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 83.

[1292] MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 60ᵛ.

[1293] _Sic._

[1294] i.e. the Ashmolean.

[1295] MS. Aubr. 23, fol. 31.

[1296] This is Aubrey's patron, so often mentioned as giving him
information.

[1297] Sept. 3, 1658.

[1298] MS. Aubr. 7, fol. 5.

[1299] i.e. March 1683/4, probably. The leaf is dated 'January 1684/5.'

[1300] MS. Aubr. 21, p. 19. Anthony Wood also alludes to her prowess
with the tankard (Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, ii. 219).

[1301] See Clark's _Reg. Univ. Oxon_, II. i. 50.

[1302] Simon Latham:--_Falconry, in 2 books_, Lond. 1614; _Another new
book of Falconry_, Lond. 1618.

[1303] i.e. when naughty are not threatened by their nurses with 'the
bogy-man.'

[1304] i.e. subsequent to 1680, for this MS. was begun in that year.

[1305] William Dobson, i. 78.

[1306] Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, i. 480: Johannes Falcandus of
Lucca is said by Clement Reyner (Apostol. Bened. in Anglia) to have
been the first apothecary in England, A.D. 1357.

[1307] The words in square brackets are scored out.

[1308] Wood's _Hist. et Antiq. Univ. Oxon._ (1674).

[1309] See p. 42, _supra_.

[1310] Subst. for 'Roman.'

[1311] i.e. crotalum.

[1312] Dupl. with 'orloge.'

[1313] i.e. in one of the lives written by Aubrey. The reference is to
the quotation given _supra_ from MS. Aubr. 6.

[1314] The same matter is found in MS. Ballard 14, fol. 126, in a
letter from Aubrey to Anthony Wood, dated Feb. 17, 1679/80.

[1315] Subst. for 'Parliament-house.'

[1316] See Clark's Wood's _City of Oxford_, i. 175; Doble's Hearne's
_Collections_, iii. 215; Madan's _Early Oxford Press_.

[1317] _Sic_, in MS.

[1318] Subst. for 'the cathedrall church.'

[1319] Some of the older sets of college rooms in Oxford still show the
difference of rooms referred to here and several times in the _Lives_.
There was a large room, the 'chamber' or living and sleeping room, with
two or more beds; off this, there were two or more tiny rooms, the
'studies,' in which the students did their work by day, boxed up close
in winter for warmth. See T. G. Jackson's _Wadham College_, p. 133.

[1320] Heraldic memorials of the events of our Saviour's passion.

[1321] The slip is perhaps of date Dec. 1681, or a little later: cp.
Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, ii. 558, iii. 3. The index to the MS.
is dated July 1, 1681 (MS. Aubr. 8, fol. 5).

[1322] Dupl. with ''twas begun.'

[1323] See i. 65. These notes by Aubrey's brother perhaps account for
the loan of the volume to him, which has caused its loss.

[1324] i.e. MS. Aubr. 3.

[1325] Henrietta Maria, consort of Charles I, came to England 1625.

[1326] Alathea (died 1654), daughter of Gilbert Talbot, 7th earl of
Shrewsbury, married in 1606 Thomas Howard, earl of Arundel.

[1327] Henry Howard, 6th duke, obiit Jan. 11, 1683/4.

[1328] Aubrey has a reference 'vide page 16 b,' i.e. MS. Aubr. 8, fol.
28ᵛ, as given _infra_. See also _supra_, p. 181.

[1329] i.e. the duty levied on it.

[1330] _Supra_, p. 91.

[1331] See Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iii. 31, 310.

[1332] i.e. a note for Aubrey's 'Observations on Ovid's _Fasti_' (see
i. 44), a Lansdowne MS., since printed.

[1333] 'Apicati cincta.'

[1334] I do not know what MS. of his Aubrey is here thinking of
inserting Avebury in; possibly the lost 'Liber B.' MS. Aubr. 9, fol.
55ᵛ, is an envelope addressed 'for Dr. Blackburne with care,' and
has the notes '_Templa Druidum_,' 'or if _Druidum Templa rediviva_,'
apparently suggested titles for a treatise by Aubrey. MS. Aubr. 11 is a
treatise by Aubrey on Stonehenge.

[1335] In North Wilts.

[1336] i.e., perhaps, Mr. Lancelot Morehouse ascribed witchcraft to
demoniacal possession.

[1337] Alt. to 'in the young men.'

[1338] To introduce them into Aubrey's projected comedy _The Country
Revel_.

[1339] Henry, 5th earl, 1st marquess.

[1340] Edward, 4th earl.

[1341] Edward, 2nd marquess of Worcester; his son Henry was created
duke of Beaufort, Dec. 2, 1682.

[1342] i.e. 90 years before 1670, the date of this note.

[1343] North Wilts.

[1344] Aubrey no doubt cites text and note from Thomas Farnaby's
edition.

[1345] Ad quem in terrâ defixum foeminae se exercent tanquam tyrones
ut simulata pugna, feriendi, insiliendi, recedendi veram disciplinam
ediscant (Vegetius.)

[1346] See facsimile at end of this volume.

[1347] The heavy wooden roller with which the ground is rolled after
sowing, or when the corn sprouts in April and May.

[1348] _Sic_ in MS.

[1349] For a similar birth at Middleton-Stony, Oxfordshire, in 1552,
see Clark's Wood's _Life and Times_, iv. 64.

[1350] i.e. except the first and second stones, they are more or less
(plus, minus) about 4 feet high. The diagram gives Aubrey's measurement
of the circle: p. = paces.

[1351] i.e. measure exactly their height.

[1352] There is no indication of the person who saw the apparition.
Anthony Wood (_Life and Times_, ii. 4) reports an apparition which
appeared to Richard Lower in 1664.

[1353] Scil. of lying in that position.

[1354] See _supra_, i. p. 128.

[1355] The MS. from which this paragraph is taken was called by Aubrey
_Faber Fortunae_, was written for his own private use (_supra_, i. p.
44), containing a number of projects by which he hoped to make money.
This here is the fourth on the list.

[1356] Apparently the real name of the injured husband.

[1357] MS. Aubr. 21, pp. 8 sqq.

[1358] i.e. 'quatre fils d'Aymon' of the old romance.

[1359] Aubrey notes that this speech is 'an ἐκφώνησις.'

[1360] Dupl. with 'hilt.'

[1361] Dupl. with 'beare.'

[1362] Dupl. with 'cup of reconciliation.'

[1363] Aubrey writes in the margin, 'Looke, looke then, boy!'; perhaps
the first line or burden of an appropriate Bacchanalian song.

[1364] Subst. for 'the waytes.'

[1365] Dupl. with 'boding.'

[1366] Subst. for 'hornes.'

[1367] By a slip Aubrey, instead of writing _Sir Eubule_ here, writes
T. T., i.e. the initials of Thomas Tyndale, whom he intended to copy in
this character.

[1368] Dupl. with 'men.'

[1369] 'he' in MS., by a slip.

[1370] Subst. for 'flebile nescio quid.'

[1371] Dupl. with 'pleasant' or 'romancy.'

[1372] Dupl. with 'drencht.'

[1373] Dupl. with 'bloated.'

[1374] i.e. drabbled with drink.

[1375] Subst. for 'tobacco.'

[1376] MS. Aubr. 21, pp. 14 sqq.

[1377] 'Richard,' in error.

[1378] Occurs as a woman's Christian name.

[1379] Afterwards 6th earl of Dorset.

[1380] Called, at several times, Robert Wright, Robert Danvers (taking
his wife's name), Robert Villiers (by usurpation).




[Illustration: PLATE I

(_a_) THE CASTLE MOUND, OXFORD

(_See_ i. 51)]

[Illustration: (_b_) RIDING AT THE QUINTIN

(_See_ ii. 330)]

[Illustration: PLATE II

VERULAM HOUSE

(_See_ i. 78)]

[Illustration: PLATE III

HOROSCOPE AND COTTAGE OF THOMAS HOBBES

(_See_ i. 328, 326)]

[Illustration: PLATE IV

PLANS OF MALMSBURY AND DISTRICT.

(_See_ i. 326, 325)]

[Illustration: PLATE V

HOROSCOPE AND ARMS OF SIR WILLIAM PETTY

(_See_ ii. 139)]

[Illustration: PLATE VI

WOLSEY'S CHAPEL AT CHRIST CHURCH (_See_ ii. 310)]

                                OXFORD

                    PRINTED AT THE CLARENDON PRESS

                         BY HORACE HART, M.A.

                       PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY




Transcriber's Notes:


    Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors were
    corrected.

    Anachronistic and non-standard spellings retained as printed.

    Italics markup is enclosed in _underscores_.

    Bold markup is enclosed in =equals=.

    Gesperrt markup is enclosed in +plus signs+.

    Strike through markup is enclosed in ~tildes~.

    Latin capital letter NN ligature is denoted by NN.

    Sidenotes with anchors were moved to paragraph footnotes and
    renumbered with Roman numeral designators, e.g. [XLII.]

    Numeric footnotes at chapter ends were redesignated with
    consecutive alphabetic letters, e.g. [AP], and moved to the
    ends of the chapters if they weren't already there.

    All other footnotes were denoted with Arabic numerals, e.g.
    [42], and moved to end notes.






End of Project Gutenberg's Brief Lives (Vol. 2 of 2), by John Aubrey

